
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8421. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-340 and ZEB1 negative feedback loop regulates TGF-ß- mediated breast cancer
progression.

Hou LK(1,)(2,)(3), Yu Y(1,)(2,)(3), Xie YG(1,)(2,)(3), Wang J(1,)(2,)(3), Mao
JF(1,)(2,)(3), Zhang B(1,)(2,)(3), Wang X(1,)(2,)(3), Cao XC(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Breast Cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin
300060, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin
300060, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin
Medical University, Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300060, China.

MicroRNAs act as key regulators in carcinogenesis and progression in various
cancers. In present study, we explored the role of miR-340 in the breast cancer
progression. Our results showed that overexpression of miR-340 inhibits breast
cancer cell proliferation and invasion, whereas depletion of miR-340 promotes
breast cancer progression. Molecularly, ZEB1 was identified as a target gene of
miR-340 and miR-340 suppressed the expression of ZEB1 by directly binding to the 
3'-UTR of ZEB1. Furthermore, ZEB1 transcriptionally suppresses miR-340
expression. The negative feedback loop regulated TGF-ß-mediated breast cancer
progression. In conclusion, our data suggested that miR-340 acted as a tumor
suppressor in breast cancer progression.

PMID: 27036021  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3447. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of long non-coding RNA-CTD903 inhibits colorectal cancer invasion 
and migration by repressing Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and predicts favorable
prognosis.

Yuan Z(1), Yu X(1), Ni B(2), Chen D(2), Yang Z(2), Huang J(2), Wang J(1), Chen
D(2), Wang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P.R. China. (2)Guangdong Institute of
Gastroenterology, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, P.R. China.

Accumulating evidence reveals that long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is essential for 
tumorigenesis and progression, but little is known about its roles and mechanisms
in metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). This study aimed to detect expression
level and prognostic role of lncRNA-CTD903 in CRC patients, which was selected
based on one microarray data. The effects on cell invasion, migration and
proliferation were investigated after silencing or overexpression of CTD903 in
CRC cell lines. We also observed the EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition)
phenomenon and effect on cell adhesion. The associations between CTD903 and EMT
markers, such as E-cadherin, N-cadherin, ß-catenin, ZEB1, ZO-1, Snail, and Twist,
were determined by western blotting. Our results showed lncRNA-CTD903 expression 
was strongly upregulated in 115 CRC patients, comparing to adjacent normal
tissues. CTD903 was proven to be an independent predicted factor of favorable
prognosis in CRC patients by using multivariate Cox proportional hazards model.
After knockdown of CTD903 in RKO and SW480, both cell invasion and migration
increased, and cells exhibited EMT-like appearance, along with reduced adhering
ability. Moreover, overexpression of CTD903 in DLD1 and HCT116 reversed these
phenotypes. Furthermore, downregulation of CTD903 enhanced Wnt/ß-catenin
activation and subsequently increased transcription factors (Twist and Snail)
expression, along with increased mesenchymal marker Vimentin and decreased
epithelial marker ZO-1 level, while overexpressed CTD903 confirmed these
associations. In conclusion, this study shows that LncRNA-CTD903 acts as a tumor 
suppressor in CRC and can inhibit cell invasion and migration through repressing 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which plays important roles in EMT and CRC metastasis.

PMID: 27035092  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:9842619. Epub 2016 Mar 13.

Periostin Facilitates the Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition of Endometrial
Epithelial Cells through ILK-Akt Signaling Pathway.

Zheng QM(1), Lu JJ(1), Zhao J(1), Wei X(1), Wang L(1), Liu PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
107 Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China.

Although periostin was confirmed to facilitate the pathogenesis of endometriosis 
by enhancing the migration, invasion, and adhesion of human endometrial stromal
cells (ESCs), its effect on the endometrial epithelial cells (EECs) is still
unknown. The current study aimed to determine whether periostin enhanced the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of EECs. EECs were isolated from 12 women
with endometriosis. The migration and invasion abilities of EECs were evaluated
by transwell assays. Expressions of proteins were detected by western blot. After
treatment with periostin, the migration and invasion abilities of EECs were
enhanced. Additionally, E-cadherin and keratin were downregulated while
N-cadherin and vimentin were upregulated in EECs. Simultaneously, levels of ILK, 
p-Akt, slug, and Zeb1 were all upregulated in EECs. After silencing the
expression of ILK in EECs, levels of p-Akt, slug, Zeb1, N-cadherin, and vimentin 
were downregulated while E-cadherin and keratin were upregulated. Although
periostin weakened the above effects in EECs after silencing the expression of
ILK, it failed to induce the EMT of EECs. Thus, periostin enhanced invasion and
migration abilities of EECs and facilitated the EMT of EECs through ILK-Akt
signaling pathway. Playing a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis,
periostin may be a new clinical therapy target for endometriosis.

PMID: 27034956  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2016 Mar 31. [Epub ahead of print]

Sarcomatoid Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder: Analysis of 28 Cases With
Emphasis on Clinicopathologic Features and Markers of Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal
Transition.

Sanfrancesco J, McKenney JK, Leivo MZ, Gupta S, Elson P, Hansel DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute (Drs Sanfrancesco and
McKenney) and the Quantitative Health Sciences Institute (Dr Elson), Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio; and the Department of Pathology, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla (Drs Leivo, Gupta, and Hansel). Dr Sanfrancesco
is now with the Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University, St
Louis, Missouri.

CONTEXT: -Sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma (UCa) is a rare but aggressive variant
of bladder cancer that can show diagnostic challenges even using ancillary
techniques.
OBJECTIVE: -To examine immunohistochemical markers in the context of sarcomatoid 
UCa, including those associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
DESIGN: -Twenty-eight cases of sarcomatoid UCa were rereviewed. Clinical outcomes
were obtained through database search. Immunohistochemistry for clinical and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers was performed.
RESULTS: -All patients had biopsy-proven invasive UCa; 61% (17 of 28) had
sarcomatoid UCa at initial diagnosis. A recognizable epithelial component(s) was 
present in 17 lesions. The sarcomatoid component accounted for 65% of the lesion 
(average), with heterologous elements present in 3 of 28 cases (11%). The
morphologic spectrum of the sarcomatoid element included spindled not otherwise
specified, myxoid, pseudoangiosarcomatous, and malignant fibrous
histiocytoma-like undifferentiated features. The sarcomatoid component was
immunoreactive for pancytokeratin (22 of 26; 85%), p63 (20 of 26; 77%),
cytokeratin 903 (17 of 26; 65%), cytokeratin 7 (16 of 26; 62%), GATA3 (16 of 26; 
62%), and cytokeratin 5/6 (16 of 26; 62%). STAT-6, CD31, CD34, and HMB45 were all
nonreactive, whereas smooth muscle actin often showed at least focal
immunoreactivity (22 of 26; 85%). Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers
were frequently expressed, including vimentin (26 of 26; 100%), FoxC2 (26 of 26; 
100%), SNAIL (23 of 26; 88.5%), and ZEB1 (18 of 26; 69.2%). Follow-up was
available for 24 patients (median, 7 months). Sixteen of 28 patients (57%) died
of disease (overall mean survival, 9.1 months). The presence of myxoid or
chordoid features was associated with reduced survival (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: -Sarcomatoid UCa is an aggressive form of UCa that frequently
expresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers, suggesting a possible
mechanism associated with aggressive tumor behavior.

PMID: 27031776  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. DNA Cell Biol. 2016 Mar 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of Antimetastatic Effect of lncRNA-ATB siRNA Delivered Using
Ultrasound-Targeted Microbubble Destruction.

Chen F(1), Li Y(1), Feng Y(1), He X(1), Wang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Ultrasound, The First Affiliated Hospital of Liaoning Medical 
University , Jinzhou, China . (2)2 Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Liaoning Medical University , Jinzhou, China .

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common human malignancies
around the world. The poor prognosis and high recurrence rate of HCC are largely 
the result of the high frequencies of intrahepatic and extrahepatic metastases.
However, the treatment of metastasis is very limited. Ultrasound-targeted
microbubble destruction (UTMD) technology has been recognized as a promising
technology for drug and gene delivery in vivo and in vitro. Long noncoding RNA
activated by transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß; lncRNA-ATB) was recently
identified, which was upregulated in HCC metastases and associated with poor
prognosis of HCC patients. In this study, we used microbubbles for UTMD-mediated 
siRNA transfection to silence lncRNA-ATB expression. We found that UTMD-mediated 
siRNA transfection significantly inhibited lncRNA-ATB expression and ZEB1 and
ZEB2 expression and suppressed cell migration and invasion. We also demonstrated 
that transfecting siRNA against lncRNA-ATB by using UTMD was more efficient than 
that by using lipidosome. UTMD-mediated siRNA transfection against lncRNA-ATB may
be a promising therapy for HCC metastasis.

PMID: 27027475  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Tumour Biol. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

The long non-coding RNA NEAT1 regulates epithelial to mesenchymal transition and 
radioresistance in through miR-204/ZEB1 axis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Lu Y(1), Li T(2), Wei G(1), Liu L(1), Chen Q(1), Xu L(1), Zhang K(3), Zeng D(4), 
Liao R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gaozhou People's Hospital, Gaozhou, China.
(2)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Gaozhou People's Hospital, Gaozhou, China. 
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gaozhou People's Hospital, Gaozhou, China.
mmgzzkq@21cn.com. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gaozhou People's Hospital,
Gaozhou, China. dehaozeng@yeah.net. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gaozhou 
People's Hospital, Gaozhou, China. rongweiliao@yeah.net.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a critical role in cancer progression,
including in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). However, it is still poorly
understood whether lncRNA regulates epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and radioresistance of NPC cells. We found that lncRNA NEAT1 was significantly
upregulated in NPC cell lines and tissues. Knockdown of NEAT1 could sensitize NPC
cells to radiation in vitro. Further investigation found that NEAT1 regulated
radioresistance by modulating EMT phenotype. Furthermore, we found that there was
reciprocal repression between NEAT1 and miR-204. ZEB1 was identified as a
downstream target of miR-204 and NEAT1 upregulated ZEB1 expression by negatively 
regulating miR-204 expression. Taking together, we proposed that NEAT1 regulated 
EMT phenotype and radioresistance by modulating the miR-204/ZEB1 axis in NPC.

PMID: 27020592  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Prostate. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.1002/pros.23183. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA alteration and putative target genes in high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate cancer: STAT3 and ZEB1 are upregulated
during prostate carcinogenesis.

Cha YJ(1), Lee JH(2), Han HH(2), Kim BG(2), Kang S(3), Choi YD(4), Cho
NH(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
(2)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Severance Biomedical Science Institute (SBSI), Yonsei 
University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Urology, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to identify alteration of cancer-related miRNAs in HGPIN and
PCa, and to investigate the clinical implications of HGPIN as a precancerous
lesion of PCa.
METHODS: Clinicopathologic analysis based on the status of HGPIN was performed in
388 patients who received radical prostatectomy between January 2005 and December
2008 in Severance Hospital. Among them, 10 paired HGPIN and PCa were prepared to 
perform miRNA microarray and quantitative real-time PCR. Fifty-two prostatectomy 
specimens were used to further validation of protein expression that was assessed
by immunohistochemical staining (IHC) in matched non-neoplastic prostatic tissue 
(NPT), HGPIN, and PCa. Functional analysis was performed using a prostate normal 
cell line (RWPE-1) and two prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, PC-3) for
comparison of expression of miR-155 and STAT3 mRNA before and after treatment of 
miR-155 mimetics/antagomir into each cell line.
RESULTS: Patients with HGPIN had significantly less lymphovascular invasion, less
lymph node metastasis, lower tumor volume, lower Gleason score, lower incidence
of death, and longer overall survival compared to patients without HGPIN.
MiR-155, miR-210, miR-153, and miR-200c were downregulated in HGPIN and PCa in
common, compared to NPT. As putative target mRNAs, mRNA expression level of
STAT3, ZEB1, and BACH1 was increased in PCa and HGPIN compared to NPT. mRNA
expression level of ephrin-A3 was increased in PCa compared to NPT, and FGFRL1
was decreased in PCa compared to HGPIN and NPT. Protein expression assessed by
IHC showed correlated results in STAT3, ZEB1, and ephrin-A3. Moreover, STAT3 and 
ZEB1 increased in a stepwise manner, from NPT to PCa. Treatment of miR-155
antagomir increased STAT3 mRNA expression in RWPE-1 cells, whereas treatment of
miR-155 mimetics into PC-3 cells significantly decreased STAT3 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: STAT3 and ZEB1 could be the key molecules altered at the early
stages of carcinogenesis, especially in HGPIN. Prostate © 2016 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 27017949  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8229. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-206 regulates cisplatin resistance and EMT in human lung adenocarcinoma cells
partly by targeting MET.

Chen QY(1), Jiao DM(1), Wang J(1), Hu H(1), Tang X(1), Chen J(1), Mou H(1), Lu
W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, The 117th Hospital of PLA, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, 310013, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, The 117th Hospital of
PLA, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310013, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a critical role in drug resistance and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The aims of this study were to explore
the potential role of miR-206 in governing cisplatin resistance and EMT in lung
cancer cells. We found that both lung adenocarcinoma A549 cisplatin-resistant
cells (A549/DDP) and H1299 cisplatin-resistant cells (H1299/DDP) acquired
mesenchymal features and were along with low expression of miR-206 and high
migration and invasion abilities. Ectopic expression of miR-206 mimics inhibited 
cisplatin resistance, reversed the EMT phenotype, decreased the migration and
invasion in these DDP-resistant cells. In contrast, miR-206 inhibitors increased 
cisplatin resistance, EMT, cell migration and invasion in non-DDP-resistant
cells. Furthermore, we found that MET is the direct target of miR-206 in lung
cancer cells. Knockdown of MET exhibited an EMT and DDP resistant inhibitory
effect on DDP-resistant cells. Conversely, overexpression of MET in non-DDP-
resistant cells produced a promoting effect on cell EMT and DDP resistance. In
lung adenocarcinoma tissues, we demonstrated that low expression of miR-206 were 
also correlated with increased cisplatin resistance and MET expression. In
addition, we revealed that miR-206 overexpression reduced cisplatin resistance
and EMT in DDP-resistant cells, partly due to inactivation of MET/PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signaling pathway, and subsequent downregulation of MDR1, ZEB1 and Snail
expression. Finally, we found that miR-206 could also sensitize A549/DDP cells to
cisplatin in mice model. Taken together, our study implied that activation of
miR-206 or inactivation of its target gene pathway could serve as a novel
approach to reverse cisplatin resistance in lung adenocarcinomas cells.

PMID: 27014910  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 25;35(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s13046-016-0329-8.

Targeted p53 activation by saRNA suppresses human bladder cancer cells growth and
metastasis.

Wang C(1,)(2), Ge Q(1), Zhang Q(1), Chen Z(3), Hu J(1), Li F(1), Ye Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, No. 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030,
Hubei, China. (2)Department of Urology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated 
Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai, 200233, China.
(3)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, No. 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030,
Hubei, China. chenzhongtongji@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Previous study showed that dsP53-285 has the capacity to induce tumor
suppressor gene p53 expression by targeting promoter in non-human primates'
cells. And it is well known that TP53 gene is frequently mutant or inactivated in
human bladder cancer. Hereby, whether this small RNA can activate the expression 
of wild-type p53 and inhibit human bladder cancer cells remains to be elucidated.
METHODS: Oligonucleotide and lentivirus were used to overexpress dsP53-285 and
dsControl. Real-time PCR and western blot were used to detect genes' mRNA and
protein expression, respectively. Cell proliferation assay, colony formation,
flow cytometry, transwell assay and wound healing assay were performed to
determine the effects on bladder cancer cells proliferation and
migration/invasion in vitro. Animal models were carried out to analyze the
effects on cells growth and metastasis in vivo.
RESULTS: Transfection of dsP53-285 into human bladder cancer cell lines T24 and
EJ readily activate wild-type p53 expression by targeting promoter. Moreover,
dsP53-285 exhibited robust capacity to inhibit cells proliferation and colony
formation, induce cells G0/G1 arrest, suppress migration and invasion. Besides,
the Cyclin-CDK genes (Cyclin D1 and CDK4/6) were down-regulated and the
EMT-associated genes (E-cadherin, ß-catenin, ZEB1 and Vimentin) were also
expressed inversely after dsP53-285 treatment. In addition, dsP53-285 could also 
significantly suppress the growth of bladder cancer xenografts and metastasis in 
nude mice. Most importantly, the anti-tumor effects mediated by dsP53-285 were
mainly achieved by manipulating wild-type p53 expression.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the dsP53-285 can upregulate wild-type p53
expression in human bladder cancer cells through RNA activation, and suppresses
cells proliferation and metastasis in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4807596
PMID: 27012825  [PubMed - in process]


10. DNA Cell Biol. 2016 Mar 23. [Epub ahead of print]

H19 Functions as a ceRNA in Promoting Metastasis Through Decreasing miR-200s
Activity in Osteosarcoma.

Li M(1), Chen H(1), Zhao Y(1), Gao S(1), Cheng C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Cangzhou Central Hospital , Hebei, China .

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone sarcoma around the world. The poor
prognosis and high recurrence rate of osteosarcoma are largely due to the high
rate of pulmonary metastasis. H19 has been reported to play a potential role in
osteosarcoma progression. However, the exact molecular mechanism of metastasis
involving H19 remains unclear. In the present study, we performed gain- and
loss-of-function assays and found that H19 promotes migration and invasion in
osteosarcoma cells. Furthermore, we showed that H19 promotes metastasis through
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 by competitively binding the miR-200 family. Thus, 
our findings suggest important roles of H19 in osteosarcoma metastasis and
indicate its potential application in osteosarcoma therapy.

PMID: 27008415  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8143. [Epub ahead of print]

DDX3 enhances oncogenic KRAS-induced tumor invasion in colorectal cancer via the 
ß-catenin/ZEB1 axis.

Wu DW(1), Lin PL(2), Cheng YW(1), Huang CC(3,)(4), Wang L(5), Lee H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Surgery, Division of Colon and
Rectum, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)School of
Public Health, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

DDX3 plays a dual role in colorectal cancer; however, the role and underlying
mechanism of DDX3 in colorectal tumorigenesis remains unclear. Here, we provide
evidence that DDX3 enhances oncogenic KRAS transcription via an increase in SP1
binding to its promoter. Accelerating oncogenic KRAS expression by DDX3 promotes 
the invasion capability via the ERK/PTEN/AKT/ß-catenin cascade. Moreover, the
ß-catenin/ZEB1 axis is responsible for DDX3-induced cell invasiveness and
xenograft lung tumor nodule formation. The xenograft lung tumor nodules induced
by DDX3-overexpressing T84 stable clone were nearly suppressed by the inhibitor
of AKT (perifosine) or ß-catenin (XAV939). Among patients, high KRAS, positive
nuclear ß-catenin expression and high ZEB1 were more commonly occurred in
high-DDX3 tumors than in low-DDX3 tumors. High-DDX3, high-KRAS, positive nuclear 
ß-catenin tumors, and high-ZEB1 exhibited worse overall survival (OS) and relapse
free survival (RFS) than their counterparts. In conclusion, DDX3 may play an
oncogenic role to promote tumor growth and invasion in colon cancer cells via the
ß-catenin/ZEB1 axis due to increasing KRAS transcription. We therefore suggest
that AKT or ß-catenin may potentially act as a therapeutic target to improve
tumor regression and outcomes in colorectal cancer patients who harbored
high-DDX3 tumors.

PMID: 27007150  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Elife. 2016 Mar 22;5. pii: e10734. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10734.

Polo-like kinase 1 induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and promotes
epithelial cell motility by activating CRAF/ERK signaling.

Wu J(1,)(2,)(3), Ivanov AI(1,)(2,)(3), Fisher PB(1,)(2,)(3), Fu Z(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, United States. (2)VCU Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, United
States. (3)VCU Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, Richmond, United States.

Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is a key cell cycle regulator implicated in the
development of various cancers, including prostate cancer. However, the functions
of PLK1 beyond cell cycle regulation remain poorly characterized. Here, we report
that PLK1 overexpression in prostate epithelial cells triggers oncogenic
transformation. It also results in dramatic transcriptional reprogramming of the 
cells, leading to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stimulation of
cell migration and invasion. Consistently, PLK1 downregulation in metastatic
prostate cancer cells enhances epithelial characteristics and inhibits cell
motility. The signaling mechanisms underlying the observed cellular effects of
PLK1 involve direct PLK1-dependent phosphorylation of CRAF with subsequent
stimulation of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2-Fra1-ZEB1/2 signaling pathway. Our findings
highlight novel non-canonical functions of PLK1 as a key regulator of EMT and
cell motility in normal prostate epithelium and prostate cancer. This study also 
uncovers a previously unanticipated role of PLK1 as a potent activator of MAPK
signaling.

PMID: 27003818  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cell Signal. 2016 Mar 18. pii: S0898-6568(16)30056-0. doi:
10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.03.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Autocrine TGF-ß/ZEB/microRNA-200 signal transduction drives
epithelial-mesenchymal transition:Kinetic models predict minimal drug dose to
inhibit metastasis.

Rateitschak K(1), Kaderali L(2), Wolkenhauer O(3), Jaster R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Rostock, 18051
Rostock, Germany; Institute for Bioinformatics, University Medicine Greifswald,
17475 Greifswald, Germany. Electronic address:
katja.rateitschak@uni-greifswald.de. (2)Institute for Bioinformatics, University 
Medicine Greifswald, 17475 Greifswald, Germany. (3)Department of Systems Biology 
and Bioinformatics, University of Rostock, 18051 Rostock, Germany; Stellenbosch
Institute for Advanced Study (STIAS), Wallenberg Research Center at Stellenbosch 
University, Marais Street, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa. (4)Department of
Medicine II, Division of Gastroenterology, Rostock University Medical Center,
18057 Rostock, Germany.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the crucial step that cancer cells
must pass before they can undergo metastasis. The transition requires the
activity of complex functional networks that downregulate properties of the
epithelial phenotype and upregulate characteristics of the mesenchymal phenotype.
The networks frequently include reciprocal repressions between transcription
factors (TFs) driving the EMT and microRNAs (miRs) inducing the reverse process, 
termed mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET). In this work we develop four
kinetic models that are based on experimental data and hypotheses describing how 
autocrine transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signal transduction induces and
maintains an EMT by upregulating the TFs ZEB1 and ZEB2 which repress the
expression of the miR-200b/c family members. After successful model calibration
we validate our models by predicting requirements for the maintenance of the
mesenchymal steady state which agree with experimental data. Finally, we apply
our validated kinetic models for the design of experiments in cancer therapy. We 
demonstrate how steady state properties of the kinetic models, combined with data
from tumor-derived cell lines of individual patients, can predict the minimal
amount of an inhibitor to induce a MET.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27000495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncogenesis. 2016 Mar 21;5:e208. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2016.17.

Kaiso depletion attenuates transforming growth factor-ß signaling and metastatic 
activity of triple-negative breast cancer cells.

Bassey-Archibong BI(1), Kwiecien JM(2,)(3), Milosavljevic SB(1), Hallett RM(4),
Rayner LG(5), Erb MJ(1), Crawford-Brown CJ(1), Stephenson KB(6), Bédard PA(1),
Hassell JA(4), Daniel JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Neurosurgery and Paediatric Neurosurgery,
Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland. (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience and Behaviour, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. (6)Centre for Innovative Cancer Research, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) represent a subset of breast tumors that
are highly aggressive and metastatic, and are responsible for a disproportionate 
number of breast cancer-related deaths. Several studies have postulated a role
for the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program in the increased
aggressiveness and metastatic propensity of TNBCs. Although EMT is essential for 
early vertebrate development and wound healing, it is frequently co-opted by
cancer cells during tumorigenesis. One prominent signaling pathway involved in
EMT is the transforming growth factor-ß (TGFß) pathway. In this study, we report 
that the novel POZ-ZF transcription factor Kaiso is highly expressed in TNBCs and
correlates with a shorter metastasis-free survival. Notably, Kaiso expression is 
induced by the TGFß pathway and silencing Kaiso expression in the highly invasive
breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 (hereafter MDA-231) and Hs578T, attenuated
the expression of several EMT-associated proteins (Vimentin, Slug and ZEB1),
abrogated TGFß signaling and TGFß-dependent EMT. Moreover, Kaiso depletion
attenuated the metastasis of TNBC cells (MDA-231 and Hs578T) in a mouse model.
Although high Kaiso and high TGFßR1 expression is associated with poor overall
survival in breast cancer patients, overexpression of a kinase-active TGFßR1 in
the Kaiso-depleted cells was insufficient to restore the metastatic potential of 
these cells, suggesting that Kaiso is a key downstream component of TGFß-mediated
pro-metastatic responses. Collectively, these findings suggest a critical role
for Kaiso in TGFß signaling and the metastasis of TNBCs.

PMID: 26999717  [PubMed]


15. Am J Dermatopathol. 2016 Apr;38(4):270-7. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000396.

Study of Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition in Atypical Fibroxanthoma and
Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma to Discern an Epithelial Origin.

Toll A(1), Gimeno J, Baró T, Hernández-Muñoz MI, Pujol RM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Dermatology, and Pathology, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut
Mar, Barcelona, Spain; and Inflammatory and Cardiovascular Disorders Program,
IMIM (Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques), Barcelona, Spain.

Atypical fibroxanthoma (AFX) is considered a fibroblastic or myofibroblastic
neoplasm probably corresponding to a superficial variant of undifferentiated
pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS). However, an epithelial origin has also been
postulated. An immunohistochemical study of the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) phenomenon was performed in a series of 19 AFX and 4 UPS to
discern an epithelial origin. A panel of epithelial (cytokeratins AE1-AE3 panel, 
podoplanin D2-40, and E-cadherin) and EMT (vimentin, Twist, Zeb1, and Snail1)
markers were evaluated in both tumoral cells and the adjacent epidermis.
Podoplanin and Snail1 were negative in all the samples. Nuclear E-cadherin,
Twist, and Zeb1 were detected in most lesions, as previously reported in other
sarcomas. In the epidermis, E-cadherin showed a normal membranous pattern and
only isolated cells were positive for vimentin. Twist and Zeb1 were mainly
negative in the epidermis. None of the immunohistochemical markers mentioned
above elicited a conspicuous bridging between the epidermis and the dermis. Our
findings suggest that EMT does not play a role in the development of AFX or UPS.

PMID: 26999338  [PubMed - in process]


16. Exp Eye Res. 2016 Mar 17;146:206-211. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2016.03.012. [Epub
ahead of print]

Inactivation of p53 in pterygium influence miR-200a expression resulting in
ZEB1/ZEB2 up-regulation and EMT processing.

Wu CW(1), Peng ML(2), Yeh KT(3), Tsai YY(4), Chiang CC(4), Cheng YW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan;
Department of Pharmacology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of
Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Pathology, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua,
Taiwan. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery,
College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan. Electronic address: ywc@tmu.edu.tw.

Loss of p53 function has been linked to progression of pterygium. MiR-200a is
known to be controlled by p53. Here, we hypothesize that expression of miR-200a
and downstream ZEB1/ZEB2 genes are regulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) involved in the pathogenesis and recurrence of pterygium. For this study,
120 primary pterygial samples were collected. Immunohistochemistry and real-time 
RT-PCR were performed to determine the expression of p53, p53 down-stream EMT
associated protein and miR-200a. The molecular correlation of p53, miR-200a and
downstream genes were confirmed using primary pterygium cells (PECs). Expression 
of miR-200a in pterygium tissues was significantly lower than in conjunctiva
controls (p = 0.015). Up-regulated miR-200a levels were positively correlated
with and p53 protein expression (p < 0.001). The miR-200a downstream ZEB1/ZEB1
protein expression were negative correlated with miR-200a expression. Cell model 
studies demonstrated that miR-200a controlled the EMT of PECs through
up-regulated ZEB1, ZEB2 and Snail gene expression. Our study demonstrated that
inactivation of p53 in pterygium may influence miR-200a, resulting in ZEB1/ZEB2
up-regulation and EMT processing of pterygium. Therefore, we suggest that
expression of miR-200a play an important role in EMT processing and recurrence of
pterygium.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26995143  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Prostate. 2016 Mar 15. doi: 10.1002/pros.23177. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-301a regulates E-cadherin expression and is predictive of prostate cancer
recurrence.

Nam RK(1), Benatar T(2), Wallis CJ(1), Amemiya Y(2), Yang W(2), Garbens A(1),
Naeim M(3), Sherman C(3), Sugar L(3), Seth A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Sunnybrook Research
Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of
Anatomic Pathology, Platform Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Health Sciences
Centre, Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Sunnybrook Health 
Sciences Centre, Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, noncoding RNAs that regulate gene
expression post-transcriptionally. Dysregulation of miRNA has been implicated in 
the development and progression of prostate cancer. Through next generation miRNA
sequencing, we recently identified a panel of five miRNAs associated with
prostate cancer recurrence and metastasis. Of the five miRNAs, miR-301a had the
strongest association with prostate cancer recurrence. Overexpression of miR-301a
in prostate cancer cells, PC3, and LNCaP resulted in increased growth both in
vitro and in xenografted tumors. We therefore sought to examine its role in
prostate carcinogenesis in greater detail.
METHODS: We examined the effect of miR-301a expression on biochemical recurrence 
and metastasis among 585 men treated with radical prostatectomy for prostate
cancer. We examined the mechanism of growth deregulation by miR-301a in prostate 
cancer cells using analysis of the miRome of prostate cancer cell lines,
quantitative PCR, and Western blotting.
RESULTS: High levels of miR-301a (above the median) were associated with an
increased risk of biochemical recurrence (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR] 1.42, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.06-1.90, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) but not of metastasis (aHR 0.84,
95%CI 0.41-1.70, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.6) after adjustment for known prognostic factors. RNA
transcriptome sequencing analysis of miR-301a overexpressing prostate cancer cell
lines identified the tumor suppressor p63 as a potential direct miR-301a target. 
Transcriptome sequencing, qPCR and Western blotting showed that miR-301a induced 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in prostate cancer cells through a
pathway initiated by p63 inhibition. Luciferase assay verified p63 as a direct
target of miR-301a. Loss of p63 resulted in miR-205 downregulation, releasing
Zeb1 and Zeb2 from inhibition, culminating in Zeb1/Zeb2 suppression of
E-cadherin. This pathway of growth alteration mediated by miR-301a upregulation
was shown to be valid in prostate cancer cell lines and patient-derived tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that miR-301a functions as an oncogene in
prostate cancer by directly targeting the p63 tumor suppressor leading to loss of
E-cadherin and EMT. Hence, miR-301a may serve as a novel biomarker in prostate
cancer as well as a therapeutic target for prostate cancer management. Prostate ©
2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26990571  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Oncol Rep. 2016 Mar 7. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4661. [Epub ahead of print]

Nobiletin inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition of human non-small cell lung
cancer cells by antagonizing the TGF-ß1/Smad3 signaling pathway.

Da C(1), Liu Y(2), Zhan Y(3), Liu K(4), Wang R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care, Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University,
Urumqi, Xinjiang 830000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Tumor
Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Chemotherapy for Lung Cancer, Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830000, P.R. China. (4)Department of Radiotherapy
for the Head and Neck, Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi,
Xinjiang 830000, P.R. China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical cellular process in cancer 
metastasis, during which epithelial polarized cells become motile mesenchymal
cells. Since transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is a potent inducer of EMT,
blocking of TGF-ß/Smad signaling has become a promising cancer therapy.
Nobiletin, a polymethoxy flavonoid from Citrus depressa, has been shown to be
valuable for cancer treatment, yet the mechanism remains unclear. In the present 
study, lung adenocarcinoma A549 and H1299 cells were used to evaluate the effect 
of nobiletin on EMT induced by TGF-ß1. Nobiletin successfully inhibited
TGF-ß1-induced EMT, migration, invasion and adhesion in vitro, accompanied by
attenuation of MMP-2, MMP-9, p-Src, p-FAK, p-paxillin, Snail, Slug, Twist and
ZEB1 expression. Nobiletin inhibited the transcriptional activity of Smads
without changing the phosphorylation status or translocation of Smads induced by 
TGF-ß1. Moreover, Smad3 is requisite in TGF-ß1-stimulated EMT. Smad3
overexpression meaningfully impaired the ability of nobiletin to reverse
TGF-ß1-induced EMT. In vivo, nobiletin prohibited the growth of metastatic
nodules in the lungs of nude mice. Moreover, nobiletin inhibited tumor growth and
reversed EMT in mice bearing A549-Luc xenografts, as revealed by IVIS imaging and
immunohistochemical analysis. Collectively, the data suggest that nobiletin
prevents EMT by inactivating TGF-ß1/Smad3 signaling.

PMID: 26986176  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Mar 16. pii: molcanther.0751.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

TWIST1 polymorphisms predict survival in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer receiving first-line bevacizumab plus oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy.

Matsusaka S(1), Zhang W(1), Cao S(1), Hanna DL(1), Sunakawa Y(1), Sebio A(2),
Ueno M(3), Yang D(1), Ning Y(1), Parekh A(1), Okazaki S(1), Berger MD(1),
Ichikawa W(4), Mizunuma N(5), Lenz HJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California. (2)Department of Medical
Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California. (3)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Cancer
Institute Hospital. (4)Division of Medical Oncology, Showa University Fujigaoka
Hospital. (5)Department of Gastroenterology, Cancer Institute Hospital.
(6)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California lenz@med.usc.edu.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important mechanism of
resistance to angiogenesis inhibition. The ability of EMT pathway genetic
variants to predict the efficacy of anti-angiogenic therapy is unknown. We
analyzed associations between functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in EMT-related genes and outcomes in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients
undergoing first-line bevacizumab-based chemotherapy. A total of 220 mCRC
patients were included in this study: 143 patients treated with first-line
bevacizumab-based chemotherapy (bevacizumab cohort) and 77 patients treated with 
cetuximab-based chemotherapy (cetuximab cohort). SNPs in TWIST1 (rs2285682,
rs2285681), ZEB1 (rs10826943, rs2839658), SNAIL (rs1543442, rs4647958), and
E-cadherin (rs16260) genes were analyzed by PCR-based direct sequencing. Patients
carrying a TWIST1 rs2285682 G allele had a significantly longer median PFS of
18.1 months and OS of 44.1 months compared to those with the T/T genotype, who
had a median PFS of 13.3 months (HR, 0.57; P=0.003) and OS of 29.2 months (HR,
0.53; P=0.001) in the bevacizumab cohort. In multivariate analysis, associations 
between TWIST1 rs2285682 and PFS and OS remained significant. Among women, the G 
allele of TWIST1 rs2285682 (PFS HR, 0.39, P=0.007; OS HR, 0.30 P=0.001) and
TWIST1 rs2285681 (PFS HR, 0.27, P<0.001; OS HR, 0.25 P<0.001) was associated with
improved survival. No significant associations were found in the cetuximab
cohort. Our findings suggest that TWIST1 polymorphisms are associated with
survival in mCRC patients treated with first-line bevacizumab-based chemotherapy 
and may serve as clinically useful biomarkers for anti-angiogenic therapy.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26983880  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2016 Mar 15. [Epub ahead of print]

QTL Mapping of Endocochlear Potential Differences between C57BL/6J and BALB/cJ
mice.

Ohlemiller KK(1), Kiener AL(2), Gagnon PM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Central Institute for the Deaf at Washington
University School of Medicine, Fay and Carl Simons Center for Hearing and
Deafness, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, St. Louis, MO,
63110, USA. kohlemiller@wustl.edu. (2)Department of Speech and Hearing Science,
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology,
Central Institute for the Deaf at Washington University School of Medicine, Fay
and Carl Simons Center for Hearing and Deafness, Washington University School of 
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.

We reported earlier that the endocochlear potential (EP) differs between C57BL/6J
(B6) and BALB/cJ (BALB) mice, being lower in BALBs by about 10 mV (Ohlemiller et 
al. Hear Res 220: 10-26, 2006). This difference corresponds to strain differences
with respect to the density of marginal cells in cochlear stria vascularis. After
about 1 year of age, BALB mice also tend toward EP reduction that correlates with
further marginal cell loss. We therefore suggested that early sub-clinical
features of the BALB stria vascularis may predispose these mice to a condition
modeling Schuknecht's strial presbycusis. We further reported (Ohlemiller et al. 
J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 12: 45-58, 2011) that the acute effects of a 2-h 110 dB
SPL noise exposure differ between B6 and BALB mice, such that the EP remains
unchanged in B6 mice, but is reduced by 40-50 mV in BALBs. In about 25 % of
BALBs, the EP does not completely recover, so that permanent EP reduction may
contribute to noise-induced permanent threshold shifts in BALBs. To identify
genes and alleles that may promote natural EP variation as well as noise-related 
EP reduction in BALB mice, we have mapped related quantitative trait loci (QTLs) 
using 12 recombinant inbred (RI) strains formed from B6 and BALB (CxB1-CxB12). EP
and strial marginal cell density were measured in B6 mice, BALB mice, their F1
hybrids, and RI mice without noise exposure, and 1-3 h after broadband noise
(4-45 kHz, 110 dB SPL, 2 h). For unexposed mice, the strain distribution patterns
for EP and marginal cell density were used to generate preliminary QTL maps for
both EP and marginal cell density. Six QTL regions were at least statistically
suggestive, including a significant QTL for marginal cell density on chromosome
12 that overlapped a weak QTL for EP variation. This region, termed Maced
(Marginal cell density QTL) supports the notion of marginal cell density as a
genetically influenced contributor to natural EP variation. Candidate genes for
Maced notably include Foxg1, Foxa1, Akap6, Nkx2-1, and Pax9. Noise exposure
produced significant EP reductions in two RI strains as well as significant EP
increases in two RI strains. QTL mapping of the EP in noise-exposed RI mice
yielded four suggestive regions. Two of these overlapped with QTL regions we
previously identified for noise-related EP reduction in CBA/J mice (Ohlemiller et
al. Hear Res 260: 47-53, 2010) on chromosomes 5 and 18 (Nirep). The present map
may narrow the Nirep interval to a ~10-Mb region of proximal Chr. 18 that
includes Zeb1, Arhgap12, Mpp7, and Gjd4. This study marks the first exploration
of natural gene variants that modulate the EP. Their orthologs may underlie some 
human hearing loss that originates in the lateral wall.

PMID: 26980469  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. BMC Genomics. 2016 Mar 15;17(1):235. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2535-3.

Genomic structure and marker-derived gene networks for growth and meat quality
traits of Brazilian Nelore beef cattle.

Mudadu MA(1,)(2), Porto-Neto LR(3), Mokry FB(4), Tizioto PC(4), Oliveira PS(4),
Tullio RR(5), Nassu RT(5), Niciura SC(5), Tholon P(5), Alencar MM(5), Higa RH(6),
Rosa AN(7), Feijó GL(7), Ferraz AL(8), Silva LO(7), Medeiros SR(7), Lanna DP(9), 
Nascimento ML(9), Chaves AS(9), Souza AR(10), Packer IU(9), Torres RA Jr(7),
Siqueira F(7), Mourão GB(9), Coutinho LL(9), Reverter A(3), Regitano LC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Agricultural Informatics, Av. André Tosello, 209, Campinas, SP,
Brazil. mauricio.mudadu@embrapa.br. (2)Embrapa Southeast Livestock, Rodovia
Washington Luiz, Km 234, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. mauricio.mudadu@embrapa.br.
(3)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization - Agriculture,
306 Carmody Road, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. (4)Department of Genetics and
Evolution, Federal University of São Carlos, Rodovia Washington Luiz, Km 235, São
Carlos, SP, Brazil. (5)Embrapa Southeast Livestock, Rodovia Washington Luiz, Km
234, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. (6)Embrapa Agricultural Informatics, Av. André
Tosello, 209, Campinas, SP, Brazil. (7)Embrapa Beef Cattle, Av. Rádio Maia, 830, 
Campo Grande, MS, Brazil. (8)State University of Mato Grosso do Sul, Rodovia
Uems-Aquidauana km 12, Aquidauana, MS, Brazil. (9)Department of Animal Science,
University of São Paulo, Av. Padua Dias, 11306, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(10)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinaria e Zootecnia, Federal University of Mato
Grosso do Sul, Av. Senador Filinto Müller, 2443, Campo Grande, MS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Nelore is the major beef cattle breed in Brazil with more than 130
million heads. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are often used to associate
markers and genomic regions to growth and meat quality traits that can be used to
assist selection programs. An alternative methodology to traditional GWAS that
involves the construction of gene network interactions, derived from results of
several GWAS is the AWM (Association Weight Matrices)/PCIT (Partial Correlation
and Information Theory). With the aim of evaluating the genetic architecture of
Brazilian Nelore cattle, we used high-density SNP genotyping data (~770,000 SNP) 
from 780 Nelore animals comprising 34 half-sibling families derived from highly
disseminated and unrelated sires from across Brazil. The AWM/PCIT methodology was
employed to evaluate the genes that participate in a series of eight phenotypes
related to growth and meat quality obtained from this Nelore sample.
RESULTS: Our results indicate a lack of structuring between the individuals
studied since principal component analyses were not able to differentiate
families by its sires or by its ancestral lineages. The application of the
AWM/PCIT methodology revealed a trio of transcription factors (comprising VDR,
LHX9 and ZEB1) which in combination connected 66 genes through 359 edges and
whose biological functions were inspected, some revealing to participate in
biological growth processes in literature searches.
CONCLUSIONS: The diversity of the Nelore sample studied is not high enough to
differentiate among families neither by sires nor by using the available
ancestral lineage information. The gene networks constructed from the AWM/PCIT
methodology were a useful alternative in characterizing genes and gene networks
that were allegedly influential in growth and meat quality traits in Nelore
cattle.

PMCID: PMC4791965
PMID: 26979536  [PubMed - in process]


22. BMC Cancer. 2016 Mar 8;16(1):194. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2237-x.

Snail heterogeneity in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Zaldumbide L(1), Erramuzpe A(2), Guarch R(3), Pulido R(4,)(5), Cortés
JM(6,)(7,)(8), López JI(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cruces University Hospital, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), Plaza de Cruces s/n, 48903, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain.
laura.zaldumbideduenas@osakidetza.eus. (2)Quantitative Biomedicine Unit,
Biocruces Health Research Institute, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain.
asier.erramuzpe@gmail.com. (3)Department of Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario de
Navarra-Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Navarra, Spain.
rosa.guarch.troyas@cfnavarra.es. (4)Biomarkers in Cancer Unit, Biocruces Health
Research Institute, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain. rpulidomurillo@gmail.com.
(5)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Bizkaia, Spain.
rpulidomurillo@gmail.com. (6)Quantitative Biomedicine Unit, Biocruces Health
Research Institute, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain. jesus.m.cortes@gmail.com.
(7)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Bizkaia, Spain.
jesus.m.cortes@gmail.com. (8)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, University
of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48940, Leioa, Spain. jesus.m.cortes@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Pathology, Cruces University Hospital, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), Plaza de Cruces s/n, 48903, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain.
joseignacio.lopez@osakidetza.eus. (10)Biomarkers in Cancer Unit, Biocruces Health
Research Institute, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain. joseignacio.lopez@osakidetza.eus.

BACKGROUND: Intratumor heterogeneity may be responsible of the unpredictable
aggressive clinical behavior that some clear cell renal cell carcinomas display. 
This clinical uncertainty may be caused by insufficient sampling, leaving out of 
histological analysis foci of high grade tumor areas. Although molecular
approaches are providing important information on renal intratumor heterogeneity,
a focus on this topic from the practicing pathologist' perspective is still
pending.
METHODS: Four distant tumor areas of 40 organ-confined clear cell renal cell
carcinomas were selected for histopathological and immunohistochemical
evaluation. Tumor size, cell type (clear/granular), Fuhrman's grade, Staging, as 
well as immunostaining with Snail, ZEB1, Twist, Vimentin, E-cadherin, ß-catenin, 
PTEN, p-Akt, p110a, and SETD2, were analyzed for intratumor heterogeneity using a
classification and regression tree algorithm.
RESULTS: Cell type and Fuhrman's grade were heterogeneous in 12.5 and 60 % of the
tumors, respectively. If cell type was homogeneous (clear cell) then the tumors
were low-grade in 88.57 % of cases. Immunostaining heterogeneity was significant 
in the series and oscillated between 15 % for p110a and 80 % for Snail. When
Snail immunostaining was homogeneous the tumor was histologically homogeneous in 
100 % of cases. If Snail was heterogeneous, the tumor was heterogeneous in 75 %
of the cases. Average tumor diameter was 4.3 cm. Tumors larger than 3.7 cm were
heterogeneous for Vimentin immunostaining in 72.5 % of cases. Tumors displaying
negative immunostaining for both ZEB1 and Twist were low grade in 100 % of the
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Intratumor heterogeneity is a common event in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma, which can be monitored by immunohistochemistry in routine practice.
Snail seems to be particularly useful in the identification of intratumor
heterogeneity. The suitability of current sampling protocols in renal cancer is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC4782341
PMID: 26951092  [PubMed - in process]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Apr 1;472(2):346-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.02.096. Epub 2016 Mar 3.

miR-1271 inhibits migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition by
targeting ZEB1 and TWIST1 in pancreatic cancer cells.

Liu H(1), Wang H(2), Liu X(3), Yu T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, PR China. (2)The First Clinical Medical College of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, PR China. (3)Department of Biotechnology, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, PR China. (4)Department of Developmental
Genetics, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, PR China. Electronic
address: tingting@njmu.edu.cn.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) remains one of the most lethal types of cancer in adults. 
The purpose of this study was to determine the role of miR-1271 in regulation of 
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis of pancreatic cancer
cells. miR-1271 was identified to be significantly down-regulated in PC tissues
by miRNA array. Also, an increase of EMT-regulators ZEB1 and TWIST1 expression
level is accompanied by a decrease of miR-1271. We showed that expression of
miR-1271 was significantly down-regulated in PC tissues as compared with that in 
normal tissues. In addition, our results showed that miR-1271 expression levels
were decreased while ZEB1 and TWIST1 expression levels were increased in detected
PC cell lines. Moreover, ectopic expression of miR-1271 suppressed and
antagomiR-1271 promoted proliferation, migration, and invasion in SW1990 and
PANC-1 cells. Bioinformatics coupled with luciferase and Western blot assays also
revealed that miR-1271 inhibited expression of ZEB1 and TWIST1, which are master 
regulators of tumor metastasis. Our study first indicates that miR-1271 functions
as a suppressor in regulating of pancreatic cancer EMT by targeting ZEB1 and
TWIST1, and it promise as a therapeutic target and prognostic marker for
metastatic pancreatic cancer.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26940738  [PubMed - in process]


24. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4940. [Epub ahead of print]

Downregulation of miR-429 and inhibition of cell migration and invasion in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Wang F(1), Jiang C(2), Sun Q(1), Yan F(1), Wang L(1), Fu Z(1), Liu T(1), Hu F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310022, P.R. China. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China.

Viral, dietary and genetic factors have been implicated in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC), however, the molecular mechanism underlying its pathogenesis
remains to be fully elucidated. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been reported to be
important in NPC tumorigenesis, with a previous miRNA microarray study showing
the downregulation of miRNA (miR)-429 in NPC cells. However, the possible
mechanisms of action of miR-429 have not been examined. In the present study, the
expression profiles of miR-429 were detected using reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis in CNE-1 and CNE-2 
cells, which are two generally used NPC cells with different degrees of
differentiation. Subsequently, cell proliferation, invasion and migration were
analyzed in miR-429-overexpressing CNE-2 cells, and the modulatory function of
miR-429 was also investigated using two target genes, zinc finger E-Box-binding
homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and CRK-like (CRKL), by transfection with miR-429 mimic or
anti-miR-429. Significant changes in the expression of miR-429 were detected,
particularly in low-differentiated CNE-2 cells, with higher levels of epidemicity
and malignancy. Additional results revealed that miR-429 inhibited the invasion
and migration of the CNE-2 cells, whereas no significant effect on cell growth
was observed. In addition, the mRNA and protein expression levels of the two
target genes, ZEB1 and CRKL, were negatively regulated by miR-429, demonstrated
through gain-of-function and loss-of-function investigations, indicating that
these two functional downstream targets may be involved in the inhibitory effects
of miR-429 on NPC migration and invasion. miR-429 may act as a negative
regulatory factor of NPC tumorigenesis, involving the functions of its downstream
targets, ZEB1 and CRKL. The results suggested miR-429 as a potential candidate
for miRNA-based prognosis or therapy against NPC.

PMID: 26936585  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 26. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7763. [Epub ahead of print]

Resveratrol suppresses myofibroblast activity of human buccal mucosal fibroblasts
through the epigenetic inhibition of ZEB1 expression.

Chang YC(1,)(2), Lin CW(3), Yu CC(1,)(2,)(4), Wang BY(5,)(6,)(7), Huang YH(3),
Hsieh YC(3), Kuo YL(8,)(9), Chang WW(3,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medical Science and
Technology, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Oral
Science, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Institute of
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Division of
Throacic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua,
Taiwan. (7)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)School of Medical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (9)Department of Medical Imaging, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (10)Department of Medical
Research, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Oral submucous fibrosis (OSF) is a precancerous condition of the oral mucosa
without specific therapeutic drugs. We previously demonstrated that the zinc
finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) plays a pathogenic role in the induction
of the myofibroblast activity of buccal mucosal fibroblasts (BMFs) and
contributes to the pathogenesis of OSF. Resveratrol is a natural polyphenolic
flavonoid with anti-fibrosis activity in various tissues and has the capability
to inhibit ZEB1 in oral cancer cells. We examined the effect of resveratrol on
the myofibroblast activity of human primary fibrotic BMFs (fBMFs) derived from
OSF tissues. With the collagen contraction assay, resveratrol displayed
anti-myofibroblast activity in three fBMF lines. Resveratrol also inhibited the
expression of fibrogenic genes at the mRNA and protein levels in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. The downregulation of ZEB1 in fBMFs by resveratrol was
mediated by epigenetic mechanisms, such as the upregulated expression of miR-200c
and the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), as well as the trimethylated lysine
27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3). Resveratrol also increased the binding of H3K27me3
to the ZEB1 promoter. The knockdown of EZH2 in fBMFs caused the upregulation of
ZEB1 and suppressed the inhibitory effect of resveratrol. Furthermore, the
reversed expression pattern between EZH2 and ZEB1 was observed in 6/8 OSF tissues
with twofold upregulation of ZEB1 expression compared with the adjacent normal
mucosa. In conclusion, our data suggest that resveratrol epigenetically inhibits 
ZEB1 expression to suppress the myofibroblast activity of fBMFs and may serve as 
a dietary supplement for OSF patients.

PMID: 26934322  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. FEBS J. 2016 Jan;283(2):206-20. doi: 10.1111/febs.13592. Epub 2015 Dec 11.

Helicobacter pylori CagA protein induces factors involved in the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in infected gastric epithelial cells in an EPIYA-
phosphorylation-dependent manner.

Sougleri IS(1), Papadakos KS(1), Zadik MP(1), Mavri-Vavagianni M(2), Mentis
AF(1), Sgouras DN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Microbiology, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens,
Greece. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece.

As a result of Helicobacter pylori adhesion to gastric epithelial cells, the
bacterial effector cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA) is translocated
intracellularly, and after hierarchical tyrosine phosphorylation on multiple
EPIYA motifs, de-regulates cellular polarity and contributes to induction of an
elongation and scattering phenotype that resembles the epithelial to mesenchymal 
transition (EMT). Stromelysin-1/matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) has been
reported to induce a sequence of molecular alterations leading to stable EMT
transition and carcinogenesis in epithelial cells. To identify the putative role 
of CagA protein in MMP-3 induction, we exploited an experimental H. pylori
infection system in gastric epithelial cell lines. We utilized isogenic mutants
expressing CagA protein with variable numbers of EPIYA and
phosphorylation-deficient EPIFA motifs, as well as cagA knockout and
translocation-deficient cagE knockout strains. Increased levels of MMP-3
transcriptional activation were demonstrated by quantitative real time-PCR for
strains with more than two terminal EPIYA phosphorylation motifs in CagA. MMP-3
expression in total cell lysates and the corresponding culture supernatants was
associated with CagA expression and translocation and was dependent on CagA
phosphorylation. A CagA EPIYA phosphorylation-dependent increase in gelatinase
and caseinolytic activity was also detected in culture supernatants by
zymography. A significant increase in the transcriptional activity of the
mesenchymal markers Vimentin, Snail and ZEB1 and the stem cell marker CD44 was
observed in the case of CagA containing phosphorylation-functional EPIYA motifs. 
Our data suggest that CagA protein induces EMT through EPIYA
phosphorylation-dependent up-regulation of MMP-3. Moreover, no significant
increase in EMT and stem cell markers was observed following infection with H.
pylori strains that cannot effectively translocate CagA protein.

© 2015 FEBS.

PMID: 26907789  [PubMed - in process]


27. Cancer Lett. 2016 May 1;374(2):261-71. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.018. Epub
2016 Feb 16.

LincRNA-ROR promotes invasion, metastasis and tumor growth in pancreatic cancer
through activating ZEB1 pathway.

Zhan HX(1), Wang Y(2), Li C(2), Xu JW(1), Zhou B(3), Zhu JK(1), Han HF(1), Wang
L(1), Wang YS(4), Hu SY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong Province 250012, China. (2)International Biotechnology R&D Center,
Shandong University School of Ocean, Weihai, Shandong Province 264209, China;
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, Shandong Province 250012,
China. (3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao
University, Qingdao, Shandong Province 266003, China. (4)International
Biotechnology R&D Center, Shandong University School of Ocean, Weihai, Shandong
Province 264209, China. Electronic address: wangyunshan135@126.com. (5)Department
of General Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province 
250012, China. Electronic address: husanyuan1962@hotmail.com.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) remains one of the most lethal malignant tumors; early
distant metastasis commonly results in poor prognosis. Recent studies confirmed
the pivotal role of the long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in tumorigenesis and
metastasis of malignant tumors, including PC. However, little is known about the 
role of LincRNA-ROR (linc-ROR) in PC. In the present study, we found that
linc-ROR was upregulated in PC tissues. Overexpression of linc-ROR promoted cells
proliferation, migration, invasion and metastasis both in vitro and in a mouse
model. Contrarily, knockdown of linc-ROR attenuated proliferation, invasion and
distant metastasis. Mechanistically, we confirmed that linc-ROR up-regulates ZEB1
and then induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which promotes the
aggressive biological behaviors of PC. Together, these results indicate that
linc-ROR acts as an important regulator of ZEB1, can promote invasion and
metastasis in PC, and may represent a novel therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26898939  [PubMed - in process]


28. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 19;16(1):127. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2143-2.

CXCR4-SDF-1 interaction potentially mediates trafficking of circulating tumor
cells in primary breast cancer.

Mego M(1,)(2,)(3), Cholujova D(4), Minarik G(5), Sedlackova T(6), Gronesova P(7),
Karaba M(8), Benca J(9), Cingelova S(10), Cierna Z(11), Manasova D(12,)(13),
Pindak D(14,)(15), Sufliarsky J(16,)(17), Cristofanilli M(18), Reuben JM(19),
Mardiak J(20,)(21).

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Klenova 
1, 833 10, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. misomego@gmail.com. (2)Translational
Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
misomego@gmail.com. (3)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
misomego@gmail.com. (4)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
dana.cholujova@savba.sk. (5)Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. gabriel.minarik@gmail.com.
(6)Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, 
Bratislava, Slovakia. tatiana.sedlackova@gmail.com. (7)Cancer Research Institute,
Slovak Academy of Sciences, Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
paulina.gronesova@gmail.com. (8)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. 
marian.karaba@nou.sk. (9)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
juraj.benca@nou.sk. (10)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
silvia.cingelova77@gmail.com. (11)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. ciernaz@gmail.com. (12)Translational
Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
d.manasova@gmail.com. (13)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
d.manasova@gmail.com. (14)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
daniel.pindak@nou.sk. (15)Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
daniel.pindak@nou.sk. (16)2nd Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine,
Comenius University, Klenova 1, 833 10, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
jozef.sufliarsky@nou.sk. (17)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
jozef.sufliarsky@nou.sk. (18)Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. Massimo.Cristofanilli@nm.org.
(19)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center Houston, Houston, TX, USA. jreuben@mdanderson.org. (20)2nd Department of
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Klenova 1, 833 10,
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. jozef.mardiak@nou.sk. (21)National Cancer Institute,
Bratislava, Slovakia. jozef.mardiak@nou.sk.

BACKGROUND: Cytokines are involved in cancer invasion and metastasis. Circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) play key role in tumor dissemination and are an independent
survival predictor in breast cancer patients. The aim of this study was to assess
correlation between CTCs and plasma cytokines in primary breast cancer (PBC)
patients.
METHODS: This study included 147 chemotherapy naïve PBC patients. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were depleted of hematopoetic cells using
RossetteSep negative selection kit. RNA extracted from CD45-depleted PBMC was
interrogated for expression of EMT (Twist1, Snail1, Slug, Zeb1) and epithelial
(Ck19) gene transcripts by qRT-PCR. The concentrations of 51 plasma cytokines
were measured using multiplex bead arrays.
RESULTS: CTCs were detected in 25.2 % patients. CTCs exhibiting only epithelial
markers (CTC_EP) and only EMT markers (CTC_EMT) were present evenly in 11.6 %
patients, while CTCs co-expressing both markers were detected in 2.0 % patients. 
Patients with presence of CTC_EP in peripheral blood had significantly elevated
levels of plasma IFN-a2, IL-3, MCP-3, ß-NGF, SCF, SCGF-ß, TNF-ß and SDF-1
compared to patients without CTC_EP. CTC_EP exhibited overexpression of SDF-1
receptor and CXCR4, but not other corresponding cytokine receptor, and in
multivariate analysis SDF-1 was independently associated with CTC_EP. There was
an inverse correlation between CTC_EMT and plasma cytokines CTACK, ß-NGF and
TRAIL, while presence of either subtype of CTCs was associated with increased
level of TGF-ß2.
CONCLUSION: Using cytokine profiling, we identified cytokines associated with
CTCs subpopulations in peripheral blood of PBC. Our data suggest that CXCR4-SDF-1
axis is involved in mobilization and trafficking of epithelial CTCs.

PMCID: PMC4759765
PMID: 26896000  [PubMed - in process]


29. Oncol Lett. 2016 Feb;11(2):1463-1468. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interconversions and the regulatory function of the ZEB
family during the development and progression of ovarian cancer.

Wu DI(1), Liu L(2), Ren C(1), Kong D(3), Zhang P(4), Jin X(4), Wang T(4), Zhang
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Qiqihar Medical
University, Qiqihar, Heilongjiang 161006, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Gynecology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150081, P.R. China. (4)Department of Pathology, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, P.R. China.

This study assessed the role of epithelial-mesenchymal interconversions and the
regulatory functions of the ZEB family during the development and progression of 
ovarian cancer. E-cadherin, vimentin, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were analyzed using
immunohistochemistry in a series of ovarian tissues that included normal tissue, 
benign tumors, borderline tumors, malignant tumors and metastatic lesions. The
correlation between E-cadherin and ZEB was analyzed. We also analyzed the
association between the expression of the four factors and clinicopathological
features in ovarian cancer. The results revealed that E-cadherin was weakly
positive in normal ovarian epithelium. Cytoplasmic E-cadherin was significantly
increased in benign tumors (P<0.01) and further increased in borderline tumors
and ovarian cancers. However, cytoplasmic E-cadherin was markedly reduced in
metastatic lesions (P<0.01). Membranous E-cadherin was increased in benign
tumors, but decreased progressively in borderline, malignant and metastatic tumor
tissues (P<0.05). The expression profile of vimentin was opposite to that of
membranous E-cadherin. Membranous E-cadherin was negatively correlated with ZEB2 
expression (r=-0.514). Additionally, cytoplasmic E-cadherin, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were
associated with the FIGO stage of ovarian cancer. ZEB1 was also correlated with
ascitic fluid volume. Our results suggest that epithelial-mesenchymal
interconversions are dynamically regulated during the development and progression
of ovarian tumors. ZEB2, but not ZEB1, may regulate the expression of membranous 
E-cadherin during these processes.

PMCID: PMC4734304
PMID: 26893761  [PubMed]


30. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 18;6:19943. doi: 10.1038/srep19943.

GRHL2-miR-200-ZEB1 maintains the epithelial status of ovarian cancer through
transcriptional regulation and histone modification.

Chung VY(1), Tan TZ(1), Tan M(1), Wong MK(1), Kuay KT(1), Yang Z(1), Ye J(1),
Muller J(2), Koh CM(2), Guccione E(2), Thiery JP(1,)(2,)(3), Huang RY(1,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Centre for Translational Medicine, 14 Medical Drive, #12-01, Singapore 117599.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos,
Singapore 13867. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, MD 7, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore, 117596.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National University Hospital, 5
Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore 119074. (5)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, MD6,
#14-02T, Singapore 117599.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a biological process by which polarized 
epithelial cells convert into a mesenchymal phenotype, has been implicated to
contribute to the molecular heterogeneity of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC).
Here we report that a transcription factor-Grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) maintains
the epithelial phenotype. EOC tumours with lower GRHL2 levels are associated with
the Mes/Mesenchymal molecular subtype and a poorer overall survival.
shRNA-mediated knockdown of GRHL2 in EOC cells with an epithelial phenotype
results in EMT changes, with increased cell migration, invasion and motility. By 
ChIP-sequencing and gene expression microarray, microRNA-200b/a is identified as 
the direct transcriptional target of GRHL2 and regulates the epithelial status of
EOC through ZEB1 and E-cadherin. Our study demonstrates that loss of GRHL2
increases the levels of histone mark H3K27me3 on promoters and GRHL2-binding
sites at miR-200b/a and E-cadherin genes. These findings support GRHL2 as a
pivotal gatekeeper of EMT in EOC via miR-200-ZEB1.

PMCID: PMC4757891
PMID: 26887977  [PubMed - in process]


31. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 18;6:21117. doi: 10.1038/srep21117.

Dynamics and plasticity of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition induced by
miR-200 family inhibition.

Haraguchi T(1), Kondo M(1), Uchikawa R(1), Kobayashi K(1), Hiramatsu H(1),
Kobayashi K(1), Chit UW(1), Shimizu T(1), Iba H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Host-Parasite Interaction, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo Div. Host-Parasite 
Interaction, Int. Med. Sci., Univ. Tokyo 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan.

Whereas miR-200 family is known to be involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a crucial biological process observed in normal and
pathological contexts, it has been largely unclear how far the functional levels 
of these tiny RNAs alone can propagate the molecular events to accomplish this
process within several days. By developing a potent inhibitor of miR-200 family
members (TuD-141/200c), the expression of which is strictly regulatable by the
Tet (tetracycline)-On system, we found using a human colorectal cell line,
HCT116, that several direct gene target mRNAs (Zeb1/Zeb2, ESRP1, FN1and FHOD1) of
miR-200 family were elevated with distinct kinetics. Prompt induction of the
transcriptional suppressors, Zeb1/Zeb2 in turn reduced the expression levels of
miR-200c/-141 locus, EpCAM, ESRP1 and E-Cad. The loss of ESRP1 subsequently
switched the splicing isoforms of CD44 and p120 catenin mRNAs to mesenchymal
type. Importantly, within 9 days after the release from the inhibition of miR-200
family, all of the expression changes in the 14 genes observed in this study
returned to their original levels in the epithelial cells. This suggests that the
inherent epithelial plasticity is supported by a weak retention of key regulatory
gene expression in either the epithelial or mesenchymal states through epigenetic
regulation.

PMCID: PMC4758077
PMID: 26887353  [PubMed - in process]


32. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:8612190. doi: 10.1155/2016/8612190.
Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Effect of Huai Qi Huang on Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition of Renal Tubular
Epithelial Cells through miR-200a.

Pu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of renal tubular epithelial cells is a
vital mechanism of renal fibrosis. Mounting evidence suggests that miR-200a
expression decreases in tubular epithelial cells in unilateral ureteral
obstruction (UUO) rats. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that Huai Qi Huang
(HQH) can ameliorate tubulointerstitial damage in adriamycin nephrosis and delay 
kidney dysfunction in primary glomerular disease. However, the effect of HQH on
EMT of tubular epithelial cells in UUO rats and its molecular mechanism is
unclear. In order to explore the effect of HQH on EMT and its molecular mechanism
in renal fibrosis, in vitro and in vivo experiments were performed in our study. 
Our results showed that HQH increased miR-200a expression in UUO rats and in
TGF-ß1 stimulated NRK-52E cells. Meanwhile, HQH decreased ZEB1 and ZEB2 (the
transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin), a-SMA expression in renal tubular
epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, we found that HQH protected
kidney from fibrosis in UUO rats. The results demonstrated that HQH regulated
miR-200a/ZEBs pathway and inhibited EMT process, which may be a mechanism of
protecting effect on tubular cells in renal fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4738749
PMID: 26884796  [PubMed]


33. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 17;6:21596. doi: 10.1038/srep21596.

Ubiquitin-specific protease 4 controls metastatic potential through ß-catenin
stabilization in brain metastatic lung adenocarcinoma.

Hwang SJ(1), Lee HW(2), Kim HR(1), Lee H(1), Shin CH(1), Yun SI(3), Lee DH(4),
Kim DH(5,)(6), Kim KK(1,)(3,)(7), Joo KM(1,)(5), Kim HH(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Urology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea. (4)Department of Neurosurgery,
Institute for Refractory Cancer Research, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea. (6)Center for 
Genome Research, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (7)Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical
Center, Seoul, Korea.

Brain metastasis is the most common type of intracranial cancer and is the main
cause of cancer-associated mortality. Brain metastasis mainly originates from
lung cancer. Using a previously established in vitro brain metastatic model, we
found that brain metastatic PC14PE6/LvBr4 cells exhibited higher expression of
ß-catenin and increased migratory activity than parental PC14PE6 cells. Knockdown
of ß-catenin dramatically suppressed the motility and invasiveness of
PC14PE6/LvBr4 cells, indicating ß-catenin is involved in controlling metastatic
potential. Since ß-catenin protein was increased without a significant change in 
its mRNA levels, the mechanism underlying increased ß-catenin stability was
investigated. We found that ubiquitin-specific protease 4 (USP4), recently
identified as a ß-catenin-specific deubiquitinylating enzyme, was highly
expressed in PC14PE6/LvBr4 cells and involved in the increased stability of
ß-catenin protein. Similar to ß-catenin knockdown, USP4-silenced PC14PE6/LvBr4
cells showed decreased migratory and invasive abilities. Moreover, knockdown of
both USP4 and ß-catenin inhibited clonogenicity and induced
mesenchymal-epithelial transition by downregulating ZEB1 in PC14PE6/LvBr4 cells. 
Using bioluminescence imaging, we found that knockdown of USP4 suppressed brain
metastasis in vivo and significantly increased overall survival and brain
metastasis-free survival. Taken together, our results indicate that USP4 is a
promising therapeutic target for brain metastasis in patients with lung
adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4756316
PMID: 26883469  [PubMed - in process]


34. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 16;11(2):e0148774. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148774.
eCollection 2016.

ZEB1 Upregulates VEGF Expression and Stimulates Angiogenesis in Breast Cancer.

Liu L(1), Tong Q(1), Liu S(1), Cui J(1), Zhang Q(2), Sun W(1), Yang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Neurovascular Regulation,
Medical College of Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. (2)Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Organ Transplantation, Tianjin First Center Hospital, Tianjin
300192, China.

Although zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) has been identified as a key
factor in the regulation of breast cancer differentiation and metastasis, its
potential role in modulating tumor angiogenesis has not been fully examined.
Here, we present the novel finding that conditioned medium derived from
ZEB1-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells significantly increased the capillary tube
formation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), whereas ZEB1
knockdown by RNA interference had the opposite effect. ZEB1 caused marked
upregulation of the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) at
both mRNA and protein levels. Pre-incubation of HUVECs with anti-VEGFA
neutralized antibody attenuated ZEB1-mediated tube formation of HUVECs. In breast
cancer tissues, expression of ZEB1 was positively correlated with those of VEGFA 
and CD31. At the molecular level, ZEB1 activated VEGFA transcription by
increasing SP1 recruitment to its promoter, which was mediated via the activation
of PI3K and p38 pathways. Using a nude mouse xenograft model, we demonstrated
that elevated expression of ZEB1 promotes in vivo tumorigenesis and angiogenesis 
in breast cancer. Collectively, we found that ZEB1-expressing breast cancer cells
increase VEGFA production and thus stimulate tumor growth and angiogenesis via a 
paracrine mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4755590
PMID: 26882471  [PubMed - in process]


35. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 15;7:10498. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10498.

ZEB1 turns into a transcriptional activator by interacting with YAP1 in
aggressive cancer types.

Lehmann W(1,)(2), Mossmann D(2,)(3), Kleemann J(4), Mock K(1,)(2), Meisinger
C(3,)(5), Brummer T(5,)(6), Herr R(6), Brabletz S(4), Stemmler MP(4), Brabletz
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg Medical
Center, Hugstetter Strasse 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (3)Institute for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ZMBZ, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg,
Stefan-Meier-Strasse 17, 91054 Freiburg, Germany. (4)Department of Experimental
Medicine 1, Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, FAU University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Glückstrasse 6, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. (5)BIOSS Centre for
Biological Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, 79104
Freiburg, Germany. (6)Institute for Molecular Medicine and Cell Research,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Strasse 17, 91054 Freiburg,
Germany.

Early dissemination, metastasis and therapy resistance are central hallmarks of
aggressive cancer types and the leading cause of cancer-associated deaths. The
EMT-inducing transcriptional repressor ZEB1 is a crucial stimulator of these
processes, particularly by coupling the activation of cellular motility with
stemness and survival properties. ZEB1 expression is associated with aggressive
behaviour in many tumour types, but the potent effects cannot be solely explained
by its proven function as a transcriptional repressor of epithelial genes. Here
we describe a direct interaction of ZEB1 with the Hippo pathway effector YAP, but
notably not with its paralogue TAZ. In consequence, ZEB1 switches its function to
a transcriptional co-activator of a 'common ZEB1/YAP target gene set', thereby
linking two pathways with similar cancer promoting effects. This gene set is a
predictor of poor survival, therapy resistance and increased metastatic risk in
breast cancer, indicating the clinical relevance of our findings.

PMCID: PMC4756710
PMID: 26876920  [PubMed - in process]


36. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 15;7:10711. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10711.

The histone variant H2A.X is a regulator of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition.

Weyemi U(1), Redon CE(1), Choudhuri R(1), Aziz T(1), Maeda D(1), Boufraqech M(2),
Parekh PR(1), Sethi TK(1), Kasoji M(3), Abrams N(3), Merchant A(3), Rajapakse
VN(1), Bonner WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Branch, Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 37 Convent Drive,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (2)Endocrine Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. (3)Center for Cancer Research
Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource, National Cancer Institute, 37 Convent
Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), considered essential for metastatic 
cancer, has been a focus of much research, but important questions remain. Here, 
we show that silencing or removing H2A.X, a histone H2A variant involved in
cellular DNA repair and robust growth, induces mesenchymal-like characteristics
including activation of EMT transcription factors, Slug and ZEB1, in HCT116 human
colon cancer cells. Ectopic H2A.X re-expression partially reverses these changes,
as does silencing Slug and ZEB1. In an experimental metastasis model, the HCT116 
parental and H2A.X-null cells exhibit a similar metastatic behaviour, but the
cells with re-expressed H2A.X are substantially more metastatic. We surmise that 
H2A.X re-expression leads to partial EMT reversal and increases robustness in the
HCT116 cells, permitting them to both form tumours and to metastasize. In a human
adenocarcinoma panel, H2A.X levels correlate inversely with Slug and ZEB1 levels.
Together, these results point to H2A.X as a regulator of EMT.

PMCID: PMC4756313
PMID: 26876487  [PubMed - in process]


37. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 15;6:20992. doi: 10.1038/srep20992.

Macrophages programmed by apoptotic cells inhibit epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in lung alveolar epithelial cells via PGE2, PGD2, and HGF.

Yoon YS(1,)(2), Lee YJ(1,)(2), Choi YH(1,)(2), Park YM(3), Kang JL(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul
158-710, Korea. (2)Tissue Injury Defense Research Center, School of Medicine,
Ewha Womans University, Seoul 158-710, Korea. (3)Department of Molecular
medicine, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 158-710, Korea.

Apoptotic cell clearance results in the release of growth factors and the action 
of signaling molecules involved in tissue homeostasis maintenance. Here, we
investigated whether and how macrophages programmed by apoptotic cells inhibit
the TGF-ß1-induced Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process in lung
alveolar epithelial cells. Treatment with conditioned medium derived from
macrophages exposed to apoptotic cells, but not viable or necrotic cells,
inhibited TGF-ß1-induced EMT, including loss of E-cadherin, synthesis of
N-cadherin and a-smooth muscle actin, and induction of EMT-activating
transcription factors, such as Snail1/2, Zeb1/2, and Twist1. Exposure of
macrophages to cyclooxygenase (COX-2) inhibitors (NS-398 and COX-2 siRNA) or
RhoA/Rho kinase inhibitors (Y-27632 and RhoA siRNA) and LA-4 cells to antagonists
of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) receptor (EP4 [AH-23848]), PGD2 receptors (DP1
[BW-A868C] and DP2 [BAY-u3405]), or the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor
c-Met (PHA-665752), reversed EMT inhibition by the conditioned medium.
Additionally, we found that apoptotic cell instillation inhibited
bleomycin-mediated EMT in primary mouse alveolar type II epithelial cells in
vivo. Our data suggest a new model for epithelial cell homeostasis, by which the 
anti-EMT programming of macrophages by apoptotic cells may control the
progressive fibrotic reaction via the production of potent paracrine EMT
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4753481
PMID: 26875548  [PubMed - in process]


38. Mol Clin Oncol. 2016 Jan;4(1):18-22. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Expression of zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox factor 1 in epithelial ovarian
cancer: A clinicopathological analysis of 238 patients.

Li X(1), Huang R(2), Li RH(3), Trope CG(4), Nesland JM(2), Suo Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 455000, P.R. China; Department of Gynaecology, Anyang Tumour
Hospital, Anyang, Henan 455000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, 0424 Oslo, Norway;
Department of Pathology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway. (3)Department of Pathology, Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Gynaecology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Department of Gynaecology, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 0379 Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 455000, P.R. China; Department of Pathology, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Department of
Pathology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway.

A growing body of evidence indicates that aberrant activation of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a key role in tumor cell
invasion and metastasis. Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox factor 1 (ZEB1), as a
crucial mediator of EMT, contributes to the malignant progression of various
epithelial tumors. To determine whether ZEB1 is involved in the progression of
ovarian cancer, we immunohistochemically evaluated the expression of ZEB1 in 238 
cases of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and analyzed its associations with
clinicopathological parameters. Positive expression of ZEB1 was observed in 32.8%
(78/238) of EOCs and it was found to be significantly associated with advanced
tumor stage (P=0.001). The survival analysis indicated that the expression of
ZEB1 was associated with a poor 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) (P=0.021).
A similar tendency was also observed between the expression of ZEB1 and 5-year
overall survival, although it did not reach statistical significance (P=0.118).
Moreover, the multivariate analysis demonstrated that ZEB1 expression was an
independent risk factor for 5-year PFS in ovarian cancer. Taken together, our
data provide evidence that ZEB1 may play a crucial role in promoting aggressive
ovarian carcinoma progression. Therefore, ZEB1 may serve as an effectively
predictive marker and a potential target for therapeutic intervention in EOC.

PMCID: PMC4727064
PMID: 26870350  [PubMed]


39. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25338. [Epub ahead of print]

Phosphorylation Regulates Functions of ZEB1 Transcription Factor.

Llorens MC(1,)(2), Lorenzatti G(1,)(2), Cavallo NL(1,)(2), Vaglienti MV(1,)(2),
Perrone AP(1,)(2), Carenbauer AL(3,)(4), Darling DS(3,)(4), Cabanillas AM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad
Nacional de Córdoba. Córdoba, Argentina. (2)Centro de Investigaciones en
Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología (CIBICI-CONICET), Córdoba, Argentina.
(3)Department of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Louisville, KY, 40292. (4)Center for Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Louisville, KY, 40292.

ZEB1 transcription factor is important in both development and disease, including
many TGFß-induced responses, and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
by which many tumors undergo metastasis. ZEB1 is differentially phosphorylated in
different cell types; however the role of phosphorylation in ZEB1 activity is
unknown. Luciferase reporter studies and electrophoresis mobility shift assays
(EMSA) show that a decrease in phosphorylation of ZEB1 increases both DNA-binding
and transcriptional repression of ZEB1 target genes. Functional analysis of ZEB1 
phosphorylation site mutants near the second zinc finger domain (termed ZD2) show
that increased phosphorylation (due to either PMA plus ionomycin, or IGF-1) can
inhibit transcriptional repression by either a ZEB1-ZD2 domain clone, or
full-length ZEB1. This approach identifies phosphosites that have a substantial
effect regulating the transcriptional and DNA-binding activity of ZEB1.
Immunoprecipitation with anti-ZEB1 antibodies followed by western analysis with a
phospho-Threonine-Proline-specific antibody indicates that the ERK consensus site
at Thr-867 is phosphorylated in ZEB1. In addition to disrupting in vitro
DNA-binding measured by EMSA, IGF-1-induced MEK/ERK phosphorylation is sufficient
to disrupt nuclear localization of GFP-ZEB1 fusion clones. These data suggest
that phosphorylation of ZEB1 integrates TGFß signaling with other signaling
pathways such as IGF-1. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26868487  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. Tumour Biol. 2016 Feb 10. [Epub ahead of print]

<U+0394>Np63a attenuates tumor aggressiveness by suppressing miR-205/ZEB1-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cervical squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhao W(1,)(2,)(3), Wang H(4), Han X(5), Ma J(4), Zhou Y(4), Chen Z(5), Zhou H(4),
Xu H(5), Sun Z(5), Kong B(6), Fang H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Anhui Provincial Hospital affiliated 
to Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. victorzhao@163.com. (2)Department of
Gynecologic Oncology, Anhui Provincial Cancer Hospital, Hefei, China.
victorzhao@163.com. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qilu Hospital,
Shandong University, Jinan, China. victorzhao@163.com. (4)Department of
Gynecologic Oncology, Anhui Provincial Cancer Hospital, Hefei, China.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Anhui Provincial Hospital affiliated 
to Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. (6)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China. (7)Department of
Nursing, Anhui Vocational Institute of Population, Chizhou, China.

Cervical cancer is one of the most common female cancers worldwide. Although the 
therapeutic outcomes of patients with early-stage cervical cancer have been
significantly improved in the past decades, tumor metastasis and recurrence
remain the major causes of cervical cancer-related deaths. In cervical squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC), the aberrant activation of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a crucial process in invasion and metastasis of epithelial
cancer, could promote lymph nodal metastasis and recurrence, and predicts poor
prognosis. In this study, we show that the expression levels of EMT markers,
ß-catenin and Vimentin, are associated with the p63 isoform <U+0394>Np63a in SCC by
using immunohistochemistry staining and analysis. Compared to the control SiHa
cells (SiHa-NC), the expression of E-cadherin and ß-catenin are upregulated,
while Vimentin and ZEB1 are downregulated in the constructed SiHa cell line with 
stable <U+0394>Np63a overexpression (SiHa-<U+0394>Np63a). Besides, the migration and invasion
abilities are also suppressed in SiHa-<U+0394>Np63a cells with a typical epithelial
morphology with cobblestone-like shape, suggesting that <U+0394>Np63a is a vital EMT
repressor in SCC cells. In addition, the involvement of miR-205/ZEB1 axis in the 
inhibition effect of <U+0394>Np63a on EMT program is revealed by a miRNA array and
confirmed by the subsequent transfection of the miR-205 mimic and antagomir.
Moreover, SCC patients with low <U+0394>Np63a expression and high EMT level show more
frequent metastasis and recurrence as well as reduced overall survival.
Therefore, EMT program and its vital repressor <U+0394>Np63a could be used as biomarkers
for tumor metastasis and recurrence in cervical cancer.

PMID: 26864590  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


41. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 26;471(1):21-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.02.008. Epub 2016 Feb 12.

The utility of tetraspanin CD9 as a biomarker for metastatic clear cell renal
cell carcinoma.

Garner JM(1), Herr MJ(2), Hodges KB(3), Jennings LK(4).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA. (2)The
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA; CirQuest Labs,
LLC, Memphis, TN, USA. Electronic address: michaelherr@cirquestlabs.com. (3)The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (4)The
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA; CirQuest Labs,
LLC, Memphis, TN, USA.

The use of tetraspanin CD9 as a biomarker for renal cell carcinomas (RCC) has
been explored with minor conclusions. Identification of a biomarker that not only
distinguishes between the different types of renal cell carcinomas, but also
predicts the metastatic potential of these tumors would significantly advance
diagnosis and prognosis of kidney cancers. We utilized established cell lines to 
better understand the contribution of CD9 to the metastatic potential of clear
cell renal cell carcinomas, and then applied our findings to the TCGA database
and immunohistochemical analysis of human samples based on tumor grading to
determine the utility of CD9 as a biomarker for RCC. Clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) cell expression of tetraspanin CD9 was compared to normal
kidney cells and found to be elevated. Upon knockdown of CD9, ccRCC cells
obtained a more metastatic phenotype. We found E-cadherin expression to be
repressed and the endothelial to mesenchymal transition markers Snail, Twist1,
and Zeb1 to be elevated upon CD9 knockdown. Upon observing these gene expression 
changes in the TCGA database and in 10 cases, we found that CD9 and E-cadherin
expression was lowered in higher grade ccRCC tumors. There was a significant
correlation between CD9 and either E-cadherin, Snail, or Zeb1 in these tumors.
Collectively, using tetraspanin CD9 in tandem with E-cadherin as a biomarker in
renal cell carcinoma will help to not only distinguish between types, but also
predict the metastatic potential of RCC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26855131  [PubMed - in process]


42. Reprod Biomed Online. 2016 Jan 15. pii: S1472-6483(16)00009-2. doi:
10.1016/j.rbmo.2015.12.013. [Epub ahead of print]

microRNA miR-200b affects proliferation, invasiveness and stemness of
endometriotic cells by targeting ZEB1, ZEB2 and KLF4.

Eggers JC(1), Martino V(2), Reinbold R(2), Schäfer SD(1), Kiesel L(1),
Starzinski-Powitz A(3), Schüring AN(1), Kemper B(4), Greve B(5), Götte M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Münster University Hospital, D-48149 
Münster, Germany. (2)Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research
Council, 20090 Segrate-Milan, Italy. (3)Institute of Anthropology and Human
Genetics for Biologists, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University of Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany. (4)Biomedical Technology Center, University of Muenster,
48149 Muenster, Germany. (5)Klinik für Strahlentherapie - Radioonkologie,
Universitätsklinikum Münster, D-48149 Münster, Germany. Electronic address:
greveb@uni-muenster.de. (6)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Münster
University Hospital, D-48149 Münster, Germany. Electronic address:
mgotte@uni-muenster.de.

Endometriosis is characterized by growth of endometrial tissue at ectopic
locations. Down-regulation of microRNA miR-200b is observed in endometriosis and 
malignant disease, driving tumour cells towards an invasive state by enhancing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). miR-200b up-regulation may inhibit
EMT and invasive growth in endometriosis. To study its functional impact on the
immortalized endometriotic cell line 12Z, the stromal cell line ST-T1b, and
primary endometriotic stroma cells, a transient transfection approach with
microRNA precursors was employed. Expression of bioinformatically predicted
targets of miR-200b was analysed by qPCR. The cellular phenotype was monitored by
Matrigel invasion assays, digital-holographic video microscopy and flow
cytometry. qPCR revealed significant down-regulation of ZEB1 (P < 0.05) and ZEB2 
(P < 0.01) and an increase in E-cadherin (P < 0.01). miR-200b overexpression
decreased invasiveness (P < 0.0001) and cell motility (P < 0.05). In contrast,
cell proliferation (P < 0.0001) and the stemness-associated side population
phenotype (P < 0.01) were enhanced following miR-200b transfection. These
properties were possibly due to up-regulation of the pluripotency-associated
transcription factor KLF4 (P < 0.05) and require attention when considering
therapeutic strategies. In conclusion, up-regulation of miR-200b reverts EMT,
emerging as a potential therapeutic approach to inhibit endometriotic cell
motility and invasiveness.

Copyright © 2015 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26854065  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Feb 6. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13307. [Epub ahead of
print]

Regulation of colorectal cancer cell epithelial to mesenchymal transition by the 
renin angiotensin system.

Ager EI(1), Neo J(1), Nguyen L(1), Christophi C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Heidelberg,
Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is implicated in
tumour progression. We aimed to determine if the renin angiotensin system (RAS)
has a role in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell EMT.
METHODS: Human CRC cell lines DLD-1 and LIM2405 used in wound scratch migration
assays where they were treated with RAS peptide ANG II alone or with blockers of 
ANG II type 1 or 2 receptors (AT1R and AT2R). Levels of epithelial (E-cadherin), 
mesenchymal (ZEB1, Vimentin) markers, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and
MMP9 were determined by flow cytometry. Mice bearing CRC liver metastases and
treated with blockers for AT1R or AT2R were examined for ZEB1 and iNOS by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: ANG II increased in-vitro CRC cell migration in both cell lines, this
was inhibited by AT1R (IRB) or AT2R blockade (PD123319). DLD1 cells treated with 
AT1R blocker resulted in increased E-cadherin, reduced ZEB1 and Vimentin
expression compared to ANGII treated cells. Treatment with AT2R blocker decreased
E-cadherin, no change in ZEB1 or Vimentin expression. AT1R blockade increased
iNOS and decreased MMP9 expression in DLD1 and LIM2405 cells. AT2R blockade
decreased iNOS and MMP9 expression in both cell lines. In vivo, ZEB1 staining was
higher in ANG II treated animals compared to control and AT1R blockade treated
animals; while activation of the AT2R led to an increase in iNOS compared to
control and AT1R blockade.
CONCLUSIONS: ANG II induced migration of CRC cells via both AT1 and AT2
receptors; the AT1R-mediated effects were associated with changes typical of EMT.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26849969  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 5;11(2):e0148404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148404.
eCollection 2016.

Irradiation Decreases the Neuroendocrine Biomarker Pro-Opiomelanocortin in Small 
Cell Lung Cancer Cells In Vitro and In Vivo.

Meredith SL(1), Bryant JL(1,)(2), Babur M(1), Riddell PW(2), Behrouzi R(1),
Williams KJ(1), White A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester,
M13 9PT, United Kingdom. (2)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester,
Manchester, M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an extremely aggressive disease,
commonly displaying therapy-resistant relapse. We have previously identified
neuroendocrine and epithelial phenotypes in SCLC tumours and the neuroendocrine
marker, pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), correlated with worse overall survival in
patients. However, the effect of treatment on these phenotypes is not understood.
The current study aimed to determine the effect of repeated irradiation treatment
on SCLC cell phenotype, focussing on the neuroendocrine marker, POMC.
RESULTS: Human SCLC cells (DMS 79) were established as subcutaneous xenograft
tumours in CBA nude mice and then exposed to repeated 2Gy irradiation. In
untreated animals, POMC in the blood closely mirrored tumour growth; an ideal
characteristic for a circulating biomarker. Following repeated localised
irradiation in vivo, circulating POMC decreased (p< 0.01), in parallel with a
decrease in tumour size, but remained low even when the tumours re-established.
The excised tumours displayed reduced and distinctly heterogeneous expression of 
POMC compared to untreated tumours. There was no difference in the epithelial
marker, cytokeratin. However, there were significantly more N-cadherin positive
cells in the irradiated tumours. To investigate the tumour response to
irradiation, DMS79 cells were repeatedly irradiated in vitro and the surviving
cells selected. POMC expression was reduced, while mesenchymal markers
N-cadherin, ß1-integrin, fibroblast-specific protein 1, ß-catenin and Zeb1
expression were amplified in the more irradiation-primed cells. There were no
consistent changes in epithelial marker expression. Cell morphology changed
dramatically with repeatedly irradiated cells displaying a more elongated shape, 
suggesting a switch to a more mesenchymal phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, POMC biomarker expression and secretion were reduced in 
SCLC tumours which regrew after irradiation and in repeatedly irradiation
(irradiation-primed) cells. Therefore, POMC was no longer predictive of tumour
burden. This highlights the importance of fully evaluating biomarkers during and 
after therapy to assess clinical utility. Furthermore, the gain in mesenchymal
characteristics in irradiated cells could be indicative of a more invasive
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4746075
PMID: 26848743  [PubMed - in process]


45. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Feb;413(1-2):189-98. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2652-3. Epub 
2016 Feb 2.

Caffeic acid phenethyl ester activates pro-apoptotic and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition-related genes in ovarian cancer cells A2780 and A2780cis.

Gherman C(1,)(2), Braicu OL(2,)(3,)(4), Zanoaga O(2), Jurj A(2), Pileczki V(2),
Maralani M(5), Drigla F(1), Braicu C(2), Budisan L(2), Achimas-Cadariu P(6,)(7), 
Berindan-Neagoe I(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology
Institute "Prof Dr. Ion Chiricuta", Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (2)Research Center for 
Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, "Iuliu Hatieganu"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (3)Department of
Surgery, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania. (4)Department of Surgical Oncology, The Oncological Institute "Prof. Dr.
Ion Chiricuta", Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Dokuz 
Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey. (6)Department of Surgery, "Iuliu Hatieganu"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. pachimas@umfcluj.ro.
(7)Department of Surgical Oncology, The Oncological Institute "Prof. Dr. Ion
Chiricuta", Cluj-Napoca, Romania. pachimas@umfcluj.ro. (8)Department of
Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology Institute "Prof Dr. 
Ion Chiricuta", Cluj-Napoca, Romania. ioana.neagoe@umfcluj.ro. (9)Research Center
for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, "Iuliu
Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
ioana.neagoe@umfcluj.ro.

Ovarian cancer is a highly aggressive pathology, displaying a poor prognosis and 
chemoresistance to classical therapy. The present study was conducted to evaluate
the effect of caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) on survival of ovarian cancer
cell lines, A2780 (sensitive to cisplatin) and A2780cis (resistant to cisplatin).
MTT assay was used to evaluate cell viability, while the apoptotic processes were
examined by flow cytometry and qRT-PCR. A reduction of cell proliferation and
activation of the apoptosis was observed in both cell lines. qRT-PCR evaluation
demonstrated the activation of the pro-apoptotic genes (BAD, CASP8, FAS, FADD,
p53) in both cell lines. The limited therapeutic effect in A2780 cells is
explained by the activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related genes
(ZEB1, ZEB2, or TGFBB1) as displayed by Ingenuity Network analysis. Overall data 
suggest that CAPE can be used as an alternative in sensitizing cells to
chemotherapy.

PMID: 26838168  [PubMed - in process]


46. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 2;6:20209. doi: 10.1038/srep20209.

Reversible interconversion and maintenance of mammary epithelial cell
characteristics by the ligand-regulated EGFR system.

Fukuda S(1,)(2), Nishida-Fukuda H(2), Nanba D(1,)(2), Nakashiro K(3), Nakayama
H(1,)(2), Kubota H(4,)(5), Higashiyama S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Growth and Tumor Regulation, Proteo-Science Center (PROS),
Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ehime University Graduate School
of Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (4)Division of Integrated Omics, Research Center
for Transomics Medicine, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. (5)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Fukuoka,
Japan.

Epithelial cell plasticity is controlled by extracellular cues, but the
underlying mechanisms remain to be fully understood. Epidermal growth factor
(EGF) and amphiregulin (AREG) are high- and low-affinity ligands for EGF receptor
(EGFR), respectively. EGFR signaling is known to promote epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) by the activation of ERK and the induction of an EMT
transcription factor, ZEB1. Here, we demonstrate that ligand-switching between
EGF and AREG at equivalent molarity reversibly interconverts epithelial and
mesenchymal-like states of EGFR signal-dependent mammary epithelial cells. The
EGF- and AREG-cultured cells also differ in their epithelial characteristics,
including the expression of cell surface markers, the mode of migration and the
ability for acinus-formation. The ligand-switching between EGF and AREG
temporally alters strength of the shared EGFR-ERK signaling. This alteration
inverts relative expression levels of ZEB1 and its antagonizing microRNAs,
miR-205 and miR-200c, those are critical determinants of the epithelial
phenotype. Further, AREG-induced EGFR accumulation on the plasma membrane
compensates for the weak association between AREG and EGFR. The EGFR dynamics
enables AREG to support proliferation as efficiently as EGF at equivalent
molarity and to maintain epithelial characteristics. Our findings reveal a role
of EGFR ligands-generated signal strength in the regulation of mammary epithelial
cell plasticity.

PMCID: PMC4735799
PMID: 26831618  [PubMed - in process]


47. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):7307-17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7007.

IL-32<U+03B8> inhibits stemness and epithelial-mesenchymal transition of cancer stem
cells via the STAT3 pathway in colon cancer.

Bak Y(1,)(2), Kwon T(1,)(2), Bak IS(2), Hong J(3), Yu DY(2), Yoon DY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Bio/Molecular Informatics Center, 
Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Disease Model Research Laboratory, Aging
Intervention Research Center, Development and Differentiation Research Center,
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Korea.

Interleukin (IL)-32 is a well-known cytokine associated with inflammation, virus 
infections and cancer. IL-32<U+03B8> is a newly identified isoform of IL-32, whose
function has yet to be elucidated. In this study, we investigated IL-32<U+03B8> function
in colon cancer stem cells. Using samples from colon cancer patients, we found
that the expression of IL-32<U+03B8> mRNAs was significantly suppressed in tumor
regions. We investigated the effects of IL-32<U+03B8> on colon cancer. Ectopic
expression of IL-32<U+03B8> attenuated invasion, migration in vitro and in vivo
tumorigenicity of colon cancer cells. IL-32<U+03B8> inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), resulting in the suppression of their migratory and invasive
capabilities of HT29 colon cancer cells. In addition, IL-32<U+03B8> altered various
properties of CSCs, including sphere formation and expression of stemness related
genes. IL-32<U+03B8> directly bound to STAT3 and inhibited its nuclear translocation,
leading to inhibited transcription of downstream factors, including Bmi1 and
ZEB1. We showed that IL-32<U+03B8> inhibited the STAT3-ZEB1 pathway and consequently
inhibited key factors of stemness and EMT. Taken together, our findings reveal
that IL-32<U+03B8> can be a tumor suppressor, indicating that IL-32<U+03B8> could possibly be
used in therapies for colon cancer.

PMID: 26824417  [PubMed - in process]


48. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):14270-82. eCollection 2015.

Microenvironmental interactions and expression of molecular markers associated
with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in colorectal carcinoma.

Lee SJ(1), Yang CS(2), Kim DD(2), Kang YN(3), Kwak SG(4), Park JB(1), Cho CH(1), 
Park KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Catholic
University of Daegu Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Keimyung
University School of Medicine Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Medical
Statistics, College of Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu Republic of Korea.

The tumor microenvironment is known to play a critical role in tumor progression,
invasion and metastasis. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is
understood as a process of tumor invasion and metastasis. Therefore, we
investigated the relation between the EMT and the microenvironment of colorectal 
carcinoma (CRC). The histological features and expression of EMT markers in tumor
cells and surrounded stromal cells were obtained from the surgically resected
tissues of 39 patients using microscopic review and immunohistochemistry. The
loss of expression of E-cadherin was more prominent in the invasive front of
tumor than the surface, where a-smooth muscle actin-positive carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) are accumulated. The signaling molecules of the Wnt and
TGF-ß1-Smad pathway were expressed more frequently in the tumor cells and/or CAFs
of the invasive margin than those of the tumor surface. The expressions of
related transcription factors, such as SNAIL and ZEB1, were increased in the
tumor cells and CAFs. The process of EMT may be activated in the tumor margin of 
CRC under the control of CAFs. Related signaling molecules and transcription
factors might be induced by paracrine effects of the surrounding CAFs.

PMCID: PMC4713529
PMID: 26823743  [PubMed - in process]


49. FEBS Lett. 2016 Jan;590(2):270-8. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12042. Epub 2016 Jan 27.

The potential role of regulator of G-protein signaling 16 in cell motility
mediated by dEF1 family proteins.

Hoshi Y(1,)(2), Endo K(2), Shirakihara T(3), Fukagawa A(1,)(2), Miyazawa K(2),
Saitoh M(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Training Program for Undergraduates, Interdisciplinary Graduate
School of Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi,
Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan.
(3)Division of Metastasis & Invasion Signaling, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Center for Medical Education and Sciences,
Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering, University of
Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with tumor progression.
We reported previously that expression of the dEF1 family proteins (dEF1/ZEB1 and
SIP1/ZEB2), key regulators of the EMT, is positively correlated with EMT
phenotypes and aggressiveness of breast cancer. Here, we show that the expression
levels of regulator of G-protein signaling 16 (RGS16) are negatively correlated
with those of the dEF1 family proteins. On the basis of the results of gain- and 
loss-of-function analyses, we suggest that dEF1 family proteins promote cell
motility of breast cancer cells directly or indirectly through repressing
expression of RGS16.

© 2015 The Authors. FEBS Letters published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

PMID: 26823172  [PubMed - in process]


50. Diabetes. 2016 Jan 28. pii: db151067. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of miR-200c restores endothelial function in diabetic mice through
suppression of COX-2.

Zhang H(1), Liu J(2), Qu D(2), Wang L(2), Luo JY(2), Lau CW(2), Liu P(3), Gao
Z(2), Tipoe GL(4), Lee HK(5), Ng CF(6), Wan Ma RC(7), Yao X(2), Huang Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vascular Medicine, Shenzhen Research Institute, and Li Ka Shing
Institute of Health Sciences , Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;
Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung and Blood Vessel Diseases, Beijing Anzhen
Hospital Affiliated to the Capital Medical University, Beijing, China; National
Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China; (2)Institute of Vascular Medicine, Shenzhen Research
Institute, and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences , Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; (3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules,
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China;
(4)Department of Anatomy, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;
(5)Department of Chemistry. (6)Department of Surgery and. (7)Department of
Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;
(8)Institute of Vascular Medicine, Shenzhen Research Institute, and Li Ka Shing
Institute of Health Sciences , Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;
yu-huang@cuhk.edu.hk.

Endothelial dysfunction plays a crucial role in the development of diabetic
vasculopathy. Our initial qPCR results showed an increased miR-200c expression in
arteries from diabetic mice and patients. However, whether miR-200c is involved
in diabetic endothelial dysfunction is unknown. Overexpression of miR-200c
impaired endothelium-dependent relaxations (EDRs) in non-diabetic mouse aortas,
while suppression of miR-200c by anti-miR-200c enhanced EDRs in diabetic db/db
mice. MiR-200c suppressed ZEB1 expression and ZEB1 overexpression ameliorated
endothelial dysfunction induced by miR-200c or associated with diabetes. More
importantly, overexpression of anti-miR-200c or ZEB1 in vivo attenuated miR-200c 
expression and improved EDRs in db/db mice. Mechanistic study with the use of
COX-2(-/-) mice revealed that COX-2 mediated miR-200c-induced endothelial
dysfunction and miR-200c up-regulated COX-2 expression in endothelial cells via
suppression of ZEB1 and increased production of PGE2 which also reduced EDR. In
conclusion, our study demonstrates for the first time that miR-200c is a new
mediator of diabetic endothelial dysfunction and inhibition of miR-200c rescues
EDRs in diabetic mice. These new findings suggest the potential usefulness of
miR-200c as the target for drug intervention against diabetic vascular
complications.

© 2016 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 26822089  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


51. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Jan 27. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2469. [Epub ahead of print]

The influence of the WWOX gene on the regulation of biological processes during
endometrial carcinogenesis.

Pluciennik E(1), Nowakowska M(1), Galdyszynska M(2), Popeda M(3), Bednarek AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Medical University of Lodz, 90-752
Lodz, Poland. (2)Department of Comparative Endocrinology, Medical University of
Lodz, 90-752 Lodz, Poland. (3)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences and Postgraduate
Education, Medical University of Lodz, 90-752 Lodz, Poland.

The purpose of the present study was to investigate the role of WW domain
containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) downregulation in biological cancer-related
processes in normal (non-malignant) and cancer endometrial cell lines. We created
an in vitro model using the normal endometrial cell line, THESC, and
2 endometrial cancer cell lines with varying degrees of differentiation, the
Ishikawa (well-differentiated) and the MFE296 (moderately differentiated) cells, 
in which the WWOX tumor suppressor gene was silenced using Gipz lentiviral shRNA.
In this model, we examined the changes in invasiveness via biological assays,
such as zymography, migration through a basement membrane, the adhesion of cells 
to extracellular matrix proteins, anchorage-independent growth and colony
formation assay. We also evaluated the correlation between the mRNA expression of
the WWOX gene and genes involved in the processes of carcinogenesis, namely
catenin beta-1 (CTNNB1) and zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) (gene
transcription), cadherin 1 (CDH1) and ezrin (EZR) (cell adhesion), vimentin (VIM)
(structural proteins), as well as phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) (tumor
suppression) and secreted protein, acidic, cysteine-rich (osteonectin) (SPARC)
(SPARC) (cell growth regulation) by RT-qPCR. Downregulation of the WWOX gene in
the moderately differentiated MFE296 cell line caused decreased migratory
capacity, and a reduction of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity.
However, these cells grew in semisolid medium and exhibited higher expression of 
CDH1 and EZR (cell adhesion) and secreted protein, acidic, cysteine-rich
(osteonectin) (SPARC) (cell growth regulation). Moreover, in the
well-differentiated endometrial cancer (Ishikawa) cell line, WWOX gene silencing 
resulted in an increased ability of the cells to proliferate indefinitely.
Additionally, WWOX regulated changes in adhesion potential in both the normal and
cancer cell lines. Our results suggest that the WWOX tumor suppressor gene
modulated the processes of cell motility, cell adhesion, gene expression and
remodeling in endometrial cell lines.

PMID: 26820701  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan 25. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4591. [Epub ahead of print]

Emodin inhibits epithelial to mesenchymal transition in epithelial ovarian cancer
cells by regulation of GSK-3ß/ß-catenin/ZEB1 signaling pathway.

Hu C(1), Dong T(1), Li R(1), Lu J(1), Wei X(1), Liu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China.

Emodin (EMO) has been shown to possess pleiotropic anticancer capabilities in
many types of cancer, including epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Inhibitory
efficacy of EMO on EOC invasion and migration was previously observed, however,
the underlying mechanisms have not been completely elucidated. The present study 
is aimed to explore the mechanisms. Transwell assay demonstrated that EMO
significantly inhibited A2780 and SK-OV-3 cell invasion. Western blot analysis
was performed to detect the expression levels of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT)-related markers. We found that EMO treatment dose-dependently
upregulated E-cadherin, keratin and downregulated N-cadherin, vimentin, matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) to repress
EMT. Mechanistically, EMO could inhibit glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK-3ß)
phosphorylation, decrease total ß-catenin protein levels and subsequently
downregulate transcription factor zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1)
expression. These effects of EMO were weakened when the cells were pretreated
with SB216763, an inhibitor of GSK-3ß kinase. Besides, we utilized small
interfering RNA (siRNA) to downregulate ZEB1 expression. We found that treatment 
of ZEB1-knockdown cells with EMO, ZEB1 levels were lowest and cell invasion was
weakest but ZEB1 knockdown had no effect on the expression of phospho-Ser9-GSK-3ß
(p-GSK-3ßSer9), ß-catenin. In conclusion, our results suggested that EMO
inhibited EOC cell invasion by regulation of GSK-3ß/ß-catenin/ZEB1 signaling
pathway to suppress EMT in vitro.

PMID: 26820690  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


53. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:232791. doi: 10.1155/2015/232791. Epub 2015 Dec 27.

Hypoxia-Induced Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition Is Involved in
Bleomycin-Induced Lung Fibrosis.

Guo L(1), Xu JM(2), Liu L(2), Liu SM(2), Zhu R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital,
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250014, China; Department of Anesthesiology,
Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.

Pulmonary fibrosis is a severe disease that contributes to the morbidity and
mortality of a number of lung diseases. However, the molecular and cellular
mechanisms leading to lung fibrosis are poorly understood. This study
investigated the roles of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the
associated molecular mechanisms in bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. The
bleomycin-induced fibrosis animal model was established by intratracheal
injection of a single dose of bleomycin. Protein expression was measured by
Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence. Typical lesions of
lung fibrosis were observed 1 week after bleomycin injection. A progressive
increase in MMP-2, S100A4, a-SMA, HIF-1a, ZEB1, CD44, phospho-p44/42 (p-p44/42), 
and phospho-p38 MAPK (p-p38) protein levels as well as activation of EMT was
observed in the lung tissues of bleomycin mice. Hypoxia increased HIF-1a and ZEB1
expression and activated EMT in H358 cells. Also, continuous incubation of cells 
under mild hypoxic conditions increased CD44, p-p44/42, and p-p38 protein levels 
in H358 cells, which correlated with the increase in S100A4 expression. In
conclusion, bleomycin induces progressive lung fibrosis, which may be associated 
with activation of EMT. The fibrosis-induced hypoxia may further activate EMT in 
distal alveoli through a hypoxia-HIF-1a-ZEB1 pathway and promote the
differentiation of lung epithelial cells into fibroblasts through phosphorylation
of p38 MAPK and Erk1/2 proteins.

PMCID: PMC4706863
PMID: 26819949  [PubMed - in process]


54. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 27;6:19874. doi: 10.1038/srep19874.

The dual function of PRMT1 in modulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
cellular senescence in breast cancer cells through regulation of ZEB1.

Gao Y(1), Zhao Y(2), Zhang J(1), Lu Y(2), Liu X(2), Geng P(2), Huang B(1), Zhang 
Y(1), Lu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun
130024, China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of the Ministry of 
Education, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130021, China.

Although the involvement of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) in
tumorigenesis has been reported, its roles in breast cancer progression and
metastasis has not been elucidated. Here we identified PRMT1 as a key regulator
of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in breast cancer. We showed that
the EMT program induced by PRMT1 endowed the human mammary epithelial cells with 
cancer stem cell properties. Moreover, PRMT1 promoted the migratory and invasive 
behaviors in breast cancer cells. We also demonstrated that abrogation of PRMT1
expression in breast cancer cells abated metastasis in vivo in mouse model. In
addition, knockdown of PRMT1 arrested cell growth in G1 tetraploidy and induced
cellular senescence. Mechanistically, PRMT1 impacted EMT process and cellular
senescence by mediating the asymmetric dimethylation of arginine 3 of histone H4 
(H4R3me2as) at the ZEB1 promoter to activate its transcription, indicating the
essential roles of this epigenetic control both in EMT and in senescence. Thus,
we unraveled a dual function of PRMT1 in modulation of both EMT and senescence
via regulating ZEB1. This finding points to the potent value of PRMT1 as a dual
therapeutic target for preventing metastasis and for inhibiting cancer cell
growth in malignant breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4728496
PMID: 26813495  [PubMed - in process]


55. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2015 Dec;36(6):601-28.

Bioinformatics analyses combined microarray identify the differentially expressed
microRNAs in periventricular leukomalacia.

Yang Y(1), Pan JJ(2), Feng Y(1), Zhou XY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Jiangsu Province People's Hospital, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China.

OBJECTIVES: With the improvement of premature infant cure rate and livability,
the incidence of PVL has been one of the main reasons for premature infant
nervous system sequelae. miRNAs are important in the regulation of cell growth,
differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis. The aim of the present study was
to identify differentially expressed miRNAs between PVL and normal tissues.
METHODS: The target genes of significant miRNA were retrieved from the miRecords 
database. Furthermore, GO analysis and biological process interaction network was
constructed using the BiNGO and Cytoscape software. Finally, KEGG analysis from
DAVID was used to find meaningful signaling pathway.
RESULTS: In conclusion, this study identified 16 differentially expressed miRNAs,
which may be important in the progression of PVL and miRNA 141 demonstrated the
greatest quantity of target genes. In addition, Hdac4, Lamc1, Irs1 and Zeb1 are
the most frequently appeared ones among proved genes. Wnt signaling pathway and
Neurotrophin signaling pathway were identified to be significantly associated
with PVL.
CONCLUSION: This work may bring some new hints for the pathogenesis of PVL in the
future work. However, further investigation regarding the specific function is
required.

PMID: 26812286  [PubMed - in process]


56. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Jan 23. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10584. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-455 suppresses non-small cell lung cancer through targeting ZEB1.

Li YJ(1), Ping C(1), Tang J(1), Zhang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardio-thoracic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Chinese
PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

MicroRNA-455 (miRNA-455), which is downregulated in human cancer, potently
mediates the multiple steps of carcinogenesis. However, the role of miR-455 in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) carcinogenesis remains unclear. In present
study, we determined the mature miRNA-455 expression in NSCLC tissues and cells
by real-time PCR. Follow-up studies examined the effects of a miR-455 mimic (gain
of function) on cell proliferation, migration and invasion. Our data indicate
that miR-455 was significantly down-regulated in NSCLC cell lines and tissues. In
functional assays, overexpression of miR-455 suppressed the proliferation,
migration and invasion of NSCLC cell lines. Data from reporter assays showed that
miR-455 directly binds to 3'UTR of ZEB1 and suppresses the endogenous level of
ZEB1 protein expression. Furthermore, overexpression of ZEB1 reverses
miR-455-suppressed malignant phenotype of NSCLC cells. Moreover, we found that
upregulation of ZEB1 expression is inversely associated with miR-455 expression
in NSCLC tissues. Taken together, miR-455 as an anti-oncogene in non-small cell
lung cancer through up-regulation of ZEB1 and serve as a potential therapeutic
target in NSCLC.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26801503  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


57. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 22;11(1):e0147236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147236.
eCollection 2016.

Expression of the Long Non-Coding RNA HOTAIR Correlates with Disease Progression 
in Bladder Cancer and Is Contained in Bladder Cancer Patient Urinary Exosomes.

Berrondo C(1), Flax J(1), Kucherov V(2), Siebert A(2), Osinski T(2), Rosenberg
A(3), Fucile C(3), Richheimer S(1), Beckham CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Department of Urology, Strong Memorial Hospital
Rochester, New York, United States of America. (2)University of Rochester School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(3)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Rochester, Strong
Memorial Hospital Rochester, New York, United States of America.

Exosomes are 30-150nM membrane-bound secreted vesicles that are readily isolated 
from biological fluids such as urine (UEs). Exosomes contain proteins, micro RNA 
(miRNA), messenger RNA (mRNA), and long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) from their cells 
of origin. Although miRNA, protein and lncRNA have been isolated from serum as
potential biomarkers for benign and malignant disease, it is unknown if lncRNAs
in UEs from urothelial bladder cancer (UBC) patients can serve as biomarkers.
lncRNAs are > 200 nucleotide long transcripts that do not encode protein and play
critical roles in tumor biology. As the number of recognized tumor-associated
lncRNAs continues to increase, there is a parallel need to include lncRNAs into
biomarker discovery and therapeutic target algorithms. The lncRNA HOX transcript 
antisense RNA (HOTAIR) has been shown to facilitate tumor initiation and
progression and is associated with poor prognosis in several cancers. The
importance of HOTAIR in cancer biology has sparked interest in using HOTAIR as a 
biomarker and potential therapeutic target. Here we show HOTAIR and several
tumor-associated lncRNAs are enriched in UEs from UBC patients with high-grade
muscle-invasive disease (HGMI pT2-pT4). Knockdown of HOTAIR in UBC cell lines
reduces in vitro migration and invasion. Importantly, loss of HOTAIR expression
in UBC cell lines alters expression of epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition (EMT) 
genes including SNAI1, TWIST1, ZEB1, ZO1, MMP1 LAMB3, and LAMC2. Finally, we used
RNA-sequencing to identify four additional lncRNAs enriched in UBC patient UEs.
These data, suggest that UE-derived lncRNA may potentially serve as biomarkers
and therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4723257
PMID: 26800519  [PubMed - in process]


58. J Clin Med. 2016 Jan 19;5(1). pii: E11. doi: 10.3390/jcm5010011.

Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and Regulation of EMT Factors by Steroid 
Nuclear Receptors in Breast Cancer: A Review and in Silico Investigation.

Voutsadakis IA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Sault Area
Hospital, Sault Ste Marie, ON P6B 0A8, Canada. ivoutsadakis@yahoo.com.
(2)Division of Clinical Sciences, Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Sudbury,
QC P3E 2C6, Canada. ivoutsadakis@yahoo.com.

Steroid Nuclear Receptors (SNRs) are transcription factors of the nuclear
receptor super-family. Estrogen Receptor (ERa) is the best-studied and has a
seminal role in the clinic both as a prognostic marker but also as a predictor of
response to anti-estrogenic therapies. Progesterone Receptor (PR) is also used in
the clinic but with a more debatable prognostic role and the role of the four
other SNRs, ERß, Androgen Receptor (AR), Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) and
Mineralocorticoid Receptor (MR), is starting only to be appreciated. ERa, but
also to a certain degree the other SNRs, have been reported to be involved in
virtually every cancer-enabling process, both promoting and impeding
carcinogenesis. Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and the reverse
Mesenchymal Epithelial Transition (MET) are such carcinogenesis-enabling
processes with important roles in invasion and metastasis initiation but also
establishment of tumor in the metastatic site. EMT is governed by several signal 
transduction pathways culminating in core transcription factors of the process,
such as Snail, Slug, ZEB1 and ZEB2, and Twist, among others. This paper will
discuss direct regulation of these core transcription factors by SNRs in breast
cancer. Interrogation of publicly available databases for binding sites of SNRs
on promoters of core EMT factors will also be included in an attempt to fill gaps
where other experimental data are not available.

PMCID: PMC4730136
PMID: 26797644  [PubMed]


59. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Sep;29(18):1648-51.

[Expression and clinical significance of ZEB2 and E-cadherin in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Yi X, Shi S, Li X, Zhao L.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression and clinical significance of ZEB2 and
E-cadherin mRNA and protein in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) tissues.
METHOD: The expressions of ZEB2 and Ecadherin in 39 cases of NPC tissue and 12
cases of nasopharyngeal inflammation tissue were detected by Real-time PCR method
and immunohistochemical technique. To assess their correlations with
clinicopathological parameters of NPC and the interrelationship between them.
RESULT: Both the expression of ZEB2 mRNA and protein were higher in NPC tissues
than that in inflammation tissues (P < 0.05). Abnormal expression of ZEB2 mRNA
and protein in NPC were significantly associated to N stage and clinic stage (P <
0.05), but the difference in expression between the different gender, age and T
stage were not statistically significant (P > 0.05). Both the expression of
Ecadherin mRNA and protein were higher in NPC tissues than that in inflammation
tissues (P < 0.05). Abnormal expression of Ecadherin mRNA and protein in NPC were
significantly associated to N stage (P < 0.05), but the different expression
between the different gender, age, T stage and clinic stage were not
statistically significant (P > 0.05). In NPC tissues, the expression of ZEB2 mRNA
was negative correlated with the expression of E-cadherin mRNA (r = -0.367, P <
0.05). The expression of ZEB1 protein was negative correlated with the expression
of E-cadherin protein (r = -0.322, P < 0.05), the differences were both
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: The expression of ZEB2 was up-regulated in NPC, while the expression 
of E-cadherin was down-regulated, their expression was significantly negative
correlated, and might be associated with metastasis of NPC, ZEB2 may promote the 
invasion and metastasis of NPC by inhibiting the expression of E-cadherin.

PMID: 26790269  [PubMed - in process]


60. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 20;11(1):e0147344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147344.
eCollection 2016.

ZEB1 Mediates Acquired Resistance to the Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor-Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Yoshida T(1), Song L(1), Bai Y(1), Kinose F(1), Li J(1), Ohaegbulam KC(2),
Muñoz-Antonia T(2), Qu X(3), Eschrich S(3), Uramoto H(4), Tanaka F(4), Nasarre
P(5), Gemmill RM(5), Roche J(5), Drabkin HA(5), Haura EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida, United States of America. (2)Department of Molecular
Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida,
United States of America. (3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.
(4)Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Occupational
and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan. (5)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine and the Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, United States
of America.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is one mechanism of acquired resistance
to inhibitors of the epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinases
(EGFR-TKIs) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The precise mechanisms of
EMT-related acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC remain unclear. We
generated erlotinib-resistant HCC4006 cells (HCC4006ER) by chronic exposure of
EGFR-mutant HCC4006 cells to increasing concentrations of erlotinib. HCC4006ER
cells acquired an EMT phenotype and activation of the TGF-ß/SMAD pathway, while
lacking both T790M secondary EGFR mutation and MET gene amplification. We
employed gene expression microarrays in HCC4006 and HCC4006ER cells to better
understand the mechanism of acquired EGFR-TKI resistance with EMT. At the mRNA
level, ZEB1 (TCF8), a known regulator of EMT, was >20-fold higher in HCC4006ER
cells than in HCC4006 cells, and increased ZEB1 protein level was also detected. 
Furthermore, numerous ZEB1 responsive genes, such as CDH1 (E-cadherin), ST14, and
vimentin, were coordinately regulated along with increased ZEB1 in HCC4006ER
cells. We also identified ZEB1 overexpression and an EMT phenotype in several
NSCLC cells and human NSCLC samples with acquired EGFR-TKI resistance.
Short-interfering RNA against ZEB1 reversed the EMT phenotype and, importantly,
restored erlotinib sensitivity in HCC4006ER cells. The level of micro-RNA-200c,
which can negatively regulate ZEB1, was significantly reduced in HCC4006ER cells.
Our results suggest that increased ZEB1 can drive EMT-related acquired resistance
to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC. Attempts should be made to explore targeting ZEB1 to
resensitize TKI-resistant tumors.

PMCID: PMC4720447
PMID: 26789630  [PubMed - in process]


61. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar;48(3):937-44. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3331. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

miR-200/ZEB axis regulates sensitivity to nintedanib in non-small cell lung
cancer cells.

Nishijima N(1), Seike M(1), Soeno C(1), Chiba M(1), Miyanaga A(1), Noro R(1),
Sugano T(1), Matsumoto M(1), Kubota K(1), Gemma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nippon Medical School, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8603, Japan.

Nintedanib (BIBF1120) is a multi-targeted angiokinase inhibitor and has been
evaluated in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients in clinical studies. In the present study, we evaluated
the antitumor effects of nintedanib in 16 NSCLC cell lines and tried to identify 
microRNA (miRNA) associated with sensitivity to nintedanib. No correlations
between FGFR, PDGFR and VEGFR family activation and sensitivity to nintedanib
were found. The difference in miRNA expression profiles between 5
nintedanib-sensitive and 5 nintedanib-resistant cell lines was evaluated by miRNA
array and quantitative RT-PCR analysis (qRT-PCR). Expression of miR-200b,
miR-200a and miR-141 belonging to the miR-200 family which contributes to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), was significantly lower in 5
nintedanib-resistant than in 5 nintedanib-sensitive cell lines. We examined the
protein expression of EMT markers in these 10 NSCLC cell lines. E-cadherin
expression was lower, and vimentin and ZEB1 expression were higher in 5
nintedanib-resistant cell lines. PC-1 was the most sensitive of the NSCLC cell
lines to nintedanib. We established nintedanib-resistant PC-1 cells (PC-1R) by
the stepwise method. PC-1R cells also showed decreased expression of miR-200b,
miR-141 and miR-429 and increased expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2. We confirmed that 
induction of miR-200b or miR-141 enhanced sensitivity to nintedanib in
nintedanib-resistant A549 and PC1-R cells. In addition, we evaluated the response
to gefitinib in combination with nintedanib after TGF-ß1 exposure of A549 cells. 
Nintedanib was able to reverse TGF-ß1-induced EMT and resistance to gefitinib
caused by miR-200b and miR-141 upregulation and ZEB1 downregulation. These
results suggested that the miR-200/ZEB axis might be predictive biomarkers for
sensitivity to nintedanib in NSCLC cells. Furthermore, nintedanib combined with
gefitinib might be a novel therapeutic strategy for NSCLC cells with EMT
phenotype and resistance to gefitinib.

PMCID: PMC4750530
PMID: 26783187  [PubMed - in process]


62. Pathol Res Pract. 2016 Mar;212(3):210-6. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.12.011. Epub
2015 Dec 20.

High nuclear expression of Twist1 in the skeletal extramedullary disease of
myeloma patients predicts inferior survival.

Yang JZ(1), Lian WG(1), Sun LX(2), Qi DW(3), Ding Y(4), Zhang XH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Second Hospital, Hebei Medical University, No.
215, Heping Western Road, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050000, PR China. (2)Department of 
Hematology, The Third Hospital, Hebei Medical University, PR China. (3)Department
of Orthopedic Oncology, The Third Hospital, Hebei Medical University, PR China.
(4)Department of Pathology, The Third Hospital, Hebei Medical University, PR
China. (5)Department of Pathology, The Second Hospital, Hebei Medical University,
No. 215, Heping Western Road, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050000, PR China. Electronic
address: zhangxianghong2008@163.com.

The aim of the study was to investigate the expression of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducing transcription factors, including Twist1 and
ZEB1, in skeletal extramedullary disease (EMD) of multiple myeloma (MM) patients 
and to clarify the effects on clinical outcomes. The expression of Twist1 and
ZEB1 in the bone marrow (BM) and the masses of skeletal EMD from 70 MM cases with
skeletal EMD and 30 MM patients without skeletal EMD were determined by
immunohistochemistry. The results demonstrated that the percentage of high
nuclear staining for Twist1 was 24.3% (17/70) in skeletal EMD, which was
significantly higher than in the BM of these patients as well as those without
skeletal EMD (P=0.030 and P=0.011). The microvessel density (MVD, P=0.004) was
significantly higher in patients with high nuclear expression of Twist1
(Twist1-high) than in those with low expression. Patients with Twist1-high
experienced a lower rate of progression-free survival (PFS, 11.8% vs. 35.0%,
P=0.000) and overall survival (OS, 52.5% vs. 83.7%, P=0.001) compared to those
with low expression. Multivariate analysis showed that Twist1-high was
independently associated with inferior PFS (HR=2.161; 95%CI: 1.116-4.183;
P=0.022) and OS (HR=3.111; 95%CI: 1.114-8.685; P=0.030). We concluded that
Twist1-high is associated with a poor prognosis and may be correlated with
angiogenesis in the skeletal EMD of MM patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774288  [PubMed - in process]


63. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Mar;15(3):906-17. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052910. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Proteomic Analysis of Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) Reveals
Cross-talk between SNAIL and HDAC1 Proteins in Breast Cancer Cells.

Palma Cde S(1), Grassi ML(1), Thomé CH(1), Ferreira GA(2), Albuquerque D(3),
Pinto MT(2), Ferreira Melo FU(2), Kashima S(2), Covas DT(2), Pitteri SJ(4), Faça 
VM(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Ribeirão Preto Medical
School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP/Brazil; the Cell-based
Therapy Center, Ribeirao Preto Blood Center, Ribeirão Preto Medical School,
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP/Brazil; and. (2)the Cell-based
Therapy Center, Ribeirao Preto Blood Center, Ribeirão Preto Medical School,
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP/Brazil; and. (3)From the Department
of Biochemistry and Immunology, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São 
Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP/Brazil; (4)the Department of Radiology, Canary Center
at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305-5101. (5)From the Department of Biochemistry and
Immunology, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, SP/Brazil; the Cell-based Therapy Center, Ribeirao Preto Blood Center,
Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto,
SP/Brazil; and vitor.faca@fmrp.usp.br.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)(1) occurs naturally during
embryogenesis, tissue repair, cancer progression, and metastasis. EMT induces
cellular and microenvironmental changes resulting in loss of epithelial and
acquisition of mesenchymal phenotypes, which promotes cellular invasive and
migratory capabilities. EMT can be triggered by extracellular factors, including 
TGF-ß, HGF, and EGF. Overexpression of transcription factors, such as SNAIL,
SLUG, ZEB1/2, and TWIST1, also induces EMT and is correlated to cancer
aggressiveness. Here, the breast adenocarcinoma cell line MCF7 was transduced
with SNAIL to identify specific mechanisms controlled by this transcription
factor during EMT. Overexpression of SNAIL led to EMT, which was thoroughly
validated by molecular, morphological, and functional experiments. Subcellular
proteome enrichment followed by GEL-LC-MS/MS was performed to provide extensive
protein fractionation and in-depth proteomic analysis. Quantitative analysis
relied on a SILAC strategy, using the invasive breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231
as a reference for quantitation. Subsets of proteins enriched in each subcellular
compartment led to a complementary list of 4289 proteins identified with high
confidence. A subset of differentially expressed proteins was validated by
Western blot, including regulation in specific cellular compartments, potentially
caused by protein translocation. Protein network analysis highlighted complexes
involved in cell cycle control and epigenetic regulation. Flow cytometry analysis
indicated that SNAIL overexpression led to cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phases.
Furthermore, down-regulation of HDAC1 was observed, supporting the involvement of
epigenetic processes in SNAIL-induced EMT. When HDAC1 activity was inhibited,
MCF7 not only apparently initiated EMT but also up-regulated SNAIL, indicating
the cross-talk between these two proteins. Both HDAC1 inhibition and SNAIL
overexpression activated the AKT pathway. These molecular mechanisms appear to be
essential to EMT and therefore for cancer metastasis. Specific control of such
epigenetic processes might then represent effective approaches for clinical
management of metastatic cancer.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26764010  [PubMed - in process]


64. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Jan 7;98(1):75-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.018. Epub
2015 Dec 31.

Autosomal-Dominant Corneal Endothelial Dystrophies CHED1 and PPCD1 Are Allelic
Disorders Caused by Non-coding Mutations in the Promoter of OVOL2.

Davidson AE(1), Liskova P(2), Evans CJ(1), Dudakova L(3), Nosková L(3), Pontikos 
N(4), Hartmannová H(3), Hodanová K(3), Stránecký V(3), Kozmík Z(5), Levis HJ(1), 
Idigo N(1), Sasai N(1), Maher GJ(6), Bellingham J(1), Veli N(7), Ebenezer ND(1), 
Cheetham ME(1), Daniels JT(1), Thaung CM(8), Jirsova K(3), Plagnol V(9), Filipec 
M(10), Kmoch S(3), Tuft SJ(8), Hardcastle AJ(11).

Author information: 
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL,
UK. (2)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V
9EL, UK; Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke
Karlovu 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic; Department of Ophthalmology, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital
in Prague, U Nemocnice 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
petra.liskova@lf1.cuni.cz. (3)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital
in Prague, Ke Karlovu 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic. (4)UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, UK; UCL Genetics
Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (5)Institute of
Molecular Genetics, Vídenská 1083, Prague 142 20, Czech Republic. (6)Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (7)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK. (8)UCL
Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, UK;
Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK. (9)UCL Genetics Institute,
University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (10)European Eye Clinic Lexum,
Antala Staka 1670/80, Prague 140 00, Czech Republic. (11)UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, UK. Electronic
address: a.hardcastle@ucl.ac.uk.

Congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy 1 (CHED1) and posterior polymorphous 
corneal dystrophy 1 (PPCD1) are autosomal-dominant corneal endothelial
dystrophies that have been genetically mapped to overlapping loci on the short
arm of chromosome 20. We combined genetic and genomic approaches to identify the 
cause of disease in extensive pedigrees comprising over 100 affected individuals.
After exclusion of pathogenic coding, splice-site, and copy-number variations, a 
parallel approach using targeted and whole-genome sequencing facilitated the
identification of pathogenic variants in a conserved region of the OVOL2 proximal
promoter sequence in the index families (c.-339_361dup for CHED1 and c.-370T>C
for PPCD1). Direct sequencing of the OVOL2 promoter in other unrelated affected
individuals identified two additional mutations within the conserved proximal
promoter sequence (c.-274T>G and c.-307T>C). OVOL2 encodes ovo-like zinc finger
2, a C2H2 zinc-finger transcription factor that regulates
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition and acts as a direct transcriptional
repressor of the established PPCD-associated gene ZEB1. Interestingly, we did not
detect OVOL2 expression in the normal corneal endothelium. Our in vitro data
demonstrate that all four mutated OVOL2 promoters exhibited more transcriptional 
activity than the corresponding wild-type promoter, and we postulate that the
mutations identified create cryptic cis-acting regulatory sequence binding sites 
that drive aberrant OVOL2 expression during endothelial cell development. Our
data establish CHED1 and PPCD1 as allelic conditions and show that CHED1
represents the extreme of what can be considered a disease spectrum. They also
implicate transcriptional dysregulation of OVOL2 as a common cause of dominantly 
inherited corneal endothelial dystrophies.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4716680 [Available on 2016-07-07]
PMID: 26749309  [PubMed - in process]


65. Cancer Sci. 2016 Mar;107(3):267-73. doi: 10.1111/cas.12877. Epub 2016 Feb 10.

RAP80 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition related with metastasis and
malignancy of cancer.

Park SY(1), Korm S(1), Chung HJ(2), Choi SJ(1), Jang JJ(1), Cho S(3), Lim YT(3), 
Kim H(2), Lee JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Analytical Science and Technology, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, Korea. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon, Korea. (3)School of Chemical Engineering, Advanced Institute
of Nanotechnology, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been closely related with invasive
and metastatic properties of cancer. Recently, the convergence of DNA damage
response and EMT in cancer development has received a great amount of scientific 
attention. Here, we showed that EMT is induced by the downregulation of RAP80, a 
well-known regulator for DNA damage response. The knockdown of RAP80 leads to
EMT-like morphological changes and the increase of tumor sphere formation in
non-adhesive culture. Mechanistically, RAP80 controls a reciprocal regulatory
axis of ZEB1 (for EMT activation) and miR200c (for EMT inhibition). The
downregulation of RAP80 increases ZEB1 protein and decreases miR200c expression
to activate EMT signaling in the form of drastic inhibitions of E-cadherin, p16
and p21 expression. Using in vivo metastasis analysis, RAP80 knockdown cells are 
shown to dramatically metastasize into the lung and generate more malignant
phenotype compared to controls. Interestingly, the expression level of RAP80 was 
positively correlated with the survival rate in lung adenocarcinoma and breast
cancer patients. These findings indicate that RAP80 is a critical gatekeeper in
impeding EMT-induced metastasis and malignant phenotypes of cancer as well as
preserving DNA integrity.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 26748910  [PubMed - in process]


66. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 5;6:18652. doi: 10.1038/srep18652.

The microRNA-200/Zeb1 axis regulates ECM-dependent ß1-integrin/FAK signaling,
cancer cell invasion and metastasis through CRKL.

Ungewiss C(1), Rizvi ZH(1), Roybal JD(1), Peng DH(1), Gold KA(1), Shin DH(1),
Creighton CJ(2,)(3), Gibbons DL(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 1400 Pressler St., The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. (3)Department of Medicine and
Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Tumor cell metastasis is a complex process that has been mechanistically linked
to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The double-negative feedback loop
between the microRNA-200 family and the Zeb1 transcriptional repressor is a
master EMT regulator, but there is incomplete understanding of how miR-200
suppresses invasion. Our recent efforts have focused on the tumor cell-matrix
interactions essential to tumor cell activation. Herein we utilized both our
Kras/p53 mutant mouse model and human lung cancer cell lines to demonstrate that 
upon miR-200 loss integrin ß1-collagen I interactions drive 3D in vitro
migration/invasion and in vivo metastases. Zeb1-dependent EMT enhances tumor cell
responsiveness to the ECM composition and activates FAK/Src pathway signaling by 
de-repression of the direct miR-200 target, CRKL. We demonstrate that CRKL serves
as an adaptor molecule to facilitate focal adhesion formation, mediates
outside-in signaling through Itgß1 to drive cell invasion, and inside-out
signaling that maintains tumor cell-matrix contacts required for cell invasion.
Importantly, CRKL levels in pan-cancer TCGA analyses were predictive of survival 
and CRKL knockdown suppressed experimental metastases in vivo without affecting
primary tumor growth. Our findings highlight the critical ECM-tumor cell
interactions regulated by miR-200/Zeb1-dependent EMT that activate intracellular 
signaling pathways responsible for tumor cell invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4700473
PMID: 26728244  [PubMed - in process]


67. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 4;11(1):e0145985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145985.
eCollection 2016.

A Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Suppresses Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition and 
Attenuates Chemoresistance in Biliary Tract Cancer.

Sakamoto T(1), Kobayashi S(1,)(2), Yamada D(1), Nagano H(1), Tomokuni A(1),
Tomimaru Y(1), Noda T(1), Gotoh K(1), Asaoka T(1), Wada H(1), Kawamoto K(1),
Marubashi S(1), Eguchi H(1), Doki Y(1), Mori M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Yamadaoka 2-2 (E2), Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (2)Department of Surgery, Osaka
Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular diseases, Nakamichi 1-3-3,
Higashinari-ku, Osaka, Osaka 537-8511, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in the characteristics of
malignancy, such as invasion, metastasis, and chemoresistance. In biliary tract
cancer (BTC), EMT is induced by transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-ß1). The
EMT is reversible; therefore, it is conceivable that it could be related to some 
epigenetic changes. We focused on histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors as
regulators of TGF-ß1 signaling, and investigated their effect on EMT and
chemoresistance. We employed four BTC cell lines (MzChA-1, gemcitabine-resistant 
MzChA-1, TFK-1, and gemcitabine-resistant TFK-1) and used vorinostat as the HDAC 
inhibitor. The relative mRNA expression of an epithelial marker (CDH1) and
mesenchymal markers (CDH2, vimentin, SNAI1) were measured by qRT-PCR to evaluate 
factors associated with EMT. MTT
(3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay was
performed to evaluate the chemoresistance of each cell line. In addition,
NOD/SCID mice were used to evaluate the effect of vorinostat in vivo. In the
parent MzChA-1 and TFK-1 cell lines, TGF-ß1 induced EMT and chemoresistance;
while vorinostat inhibited the EMT and chemoresistance induced by TGF-ß1. In
gemcitabine-resistant cell lines that highly expressed TGF-ß1, vorinostat
inhibited EMT and attenuated chemoresistance. We showed that vorinostat inhibits 
nuclear translocation of SMAD4 which is a signaling factor of TGF-ß1, and this is
one of the mechanisms by which vorinostat regulates EMT. We also showed that
vorinostat attenuates the binding affinity of SMAD4 to the CDH1-related
transcription factors SNAI1, SNAI2, ZEB1, ZEB2, and TWIST. Furthermore,
combination therapy with vorinostat and gemcitabine improved survival time in the
mice xenografted with gemcitabine resistant MzChA-1 cells. In conclusion,
vorinostat regulated TGF-ß1-induced EMT and chemoresistance through inhibition of
SMAD4 nuclear translocation.

PMCID: PMC4699768
PMID: 26726879  [PubMed - in process]


68. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb;13(2):1681-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4733. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

SET8 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and enhances prostate cancer cell 
metastasis by cooperating with ZEB1.

Hou L(1), Li Q(2), Yu Y(3), Li M(4), Zhang D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Ningbo
University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315021, P.R. China. (2)Department of Urology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Shihezi University School of Medicine, Shihezi,
Xinjiang 832000, P.R. China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The
Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang
315000, P.R. China. (4)Department of Urology, The Sixth Renmin Hospital of
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200233, P.R. China. (5)Zhejiang University
City College, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310015, P.R. China.

Mounting evidence suggested that histone H4K20-specific methyltransferase SET8 is
required to maintain the malignant phenotype of various cancer types; however,
the role of SET8 in mediating tumor metastasis in prostate cancer (PCa) has
remained elusive. The present study demonstrated that small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown of SET8 inhibited the invasive potential of the PCa cell
line PC-3 in vitro. Knockdown of SET8 reduced sphere formation, downregulated
E-cadherin and a-catenin, and upregulated N-cadherin and vimentin expression in
CaP cells, while upregulation of SET8 expression with a recombinant plasmid had
the opposite effect. Furthermore, SET8 was shown to be physically associated with
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) inducer zinc finger E-box-binding
homeobox 1 (ZEB1) in PCa cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation suggested that
SET8 binds to the promoter of cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin and vimentin.
Luciferase reporter assays suggested that E-cadherin and vimentin are direct
targets of SET8; furthermore, loss- and gain-of function studies of SET8 and ZEB1
indicated that suppression of downstream E-cadherin and activation of vimentin
are important mechanisms by which SET8 and ZEB1 cooperatively trigger metastasis.
Furthermore, SET8-induced methylated H4K20 was indicated to exert a dual function
in ZEB1-regulated gene expression. In conclusion, the present study revealed that
SET8 and ZEB1 are functionally interdependent in promoting the EMT and enhancing 
the invasive potential of PCa cells in vitro.

PMID: 26717907  [PubMed - in process]


69. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015 Dec 22;13(1). pii: E10. doi:
10.3390/ijerph13010010.

Glyceollin I Reverses Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition in Letrozole Resistant
Breast Cancer through ZEB1.

Carriere PP(1), Llopis SD(2), Naiki AC(3), Nguyen G(4), Phan T(5), Nguyen MM(6), 
Preyan LC(7), Yearby L(8), Pratt J(9), Burks H(10), Davenport IR(11), Nguyen
TA(12), Parker-Lemieux K(13), Payton-Stewart F(14), Williams CC(15), Boué SM(16),
Burow ME(17), Collins-Burow B(18), Hilliard A(19), Davidson AM(20), Tilghman
SL(21).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New
Orleans, LA 70125, USA. pcarriere@msm.edu. (2)College of Pharmacy, Xavier
University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA.
sllopis@xula.edu. (3)College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1
Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA. acnaiki@gmail.com. (4)College of
Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, 
USA. gi.nguye@gmail.com. (5)College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, 
1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA. tphan0917@gmail.com. (6)College of
Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, 
USA. marym.nguy@gmail.com. (7)College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of
Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA. lynezpreyan@gmail.com.
(8)College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New
Orleans, LA 70125, USA. lyearby@xula.edu. (9)College of Pharmacy, Xavier
University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA.
jpratt1@xula.edu. (10)Tulane University Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave, 
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. hburks@tulane.edu. (11)Division of Biological and
Public Health Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, Xavier University of
Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA. idavenpo@xula.edu.
(12)College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New
Orleans, LA 70125, USA. tnguye71@xula.edu. (13)College of Pharmacy, Xavier
University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA.
kparker1@xula.edu. (14)Division of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, College of
Arts and Sciences, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans,
LA 70125, USA. flpayton@xula.edu. (15)College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of
Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New Orleans, LA 70125, USA. cwillia35@xula.edu.
(16)Southern Regional Research Center, United States Department of Agriculture,
New Orleans, LA 70124, USA. steve.boue@ars.usda.gov. (17)Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. mburow@tulane.edu. 
(18)Tulane University Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA
70112, USA. bcollins1@tulane.edu. (19)Division of Basic Sciences, College of
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Florida A&amp;M University, 1415 S. Martin 
L. King Jr. Blvd., Tallahassee, FL 32307, USA. aaron.hilliard@famu.edu.
(20)Division of Basic Sciences, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Florida A&amp;M University, 1415 S. Martin L. King Jr. Blvd., Tallahassee, FL
32307, USA. michael.davidson@famu.edu. (21)Division of Basic Sciences, College of
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Florida A&amp;M University, 1415 S. Martin 
L. King Jr. Blvd., Tallahassee, FL 32307, USA. syreeta.tilghman@famu.edu.

Although aromatase inhibitors are standard endocrine therapy for postmenopausal
women with early-stage metastatic estrogen-dependent breast cancer, they are
limited by the development of drug resistance. A better understanding of this
process is critical towards designing novel strategies for disease management.
Previously, we demonstrated a global proteomic signature of letrozole-resistance 
associated with hormone-independence, enhanced cell motility and implications of 
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). Letrozole-resistant breast cancer cells 
(LTLT-Ca) were treated with a novel phytoalexin, glyceollin I, and exhibited
morphological characteristics synonymous with an epithelial phenotype and
decreased proliferation. Letrozole-resistance increased Zinc Finger E-Box Binding
Homeobox 1 (ZEB1) expression (4.51-fold), while glyceollin I treatment caused a
-3.39-fold reduction. Immunofluorescence analyses resulted of glyceollin
I-induced increase and decrease in E-cadherin and ZEB1, respectively. In vivo
studies performed in ovariectomized, female nude mice indicated that glyceollin
treated tumors stained weakly for ZEB1 and N-cadherin and strongly for
E-cadherin. Compared to letrozole-sensitive cells, LTLT-Ca cells displayed
enhanced motility, however in the presence of glyceollin I, exhibited a 68% and
83% decrease in invasion and migration, respectively. These effects of glyceollin
I were mediated in part by inhibition of ZEB1, thus indicating therapeutic
potential of glyceollin I in targeting EMT in letrozole resistant breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4730401
PMID: 26703648  [PubMed - in process]


70. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016 Mar 1;310(5):L439-51. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00117.2015. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Mesenchymal stem cells protect from hypoxia-induced alveolar
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Uzunhan Y(1), Bernard O(2), Marchant D(2), Dard N(2), Vanneaux V(3), Larghero
J(3), Gille T(1), Clerici C(4), Valeyre D(1), Nunes H(1), Boncoeur E(2), Planès
C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Laboratoire Hypoxie & Poumon,
Bobigny, France; AP-HP, Hôpital Avicenne, Bobigny, France; (2)Université Paris
13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Laboratoire Hypoxie & Poumon, Bobigny, France; (3)AP-HP,
Hôpital Saint Louis, Unité de Thérapie Cellulaire et CIC de Biothérapies, Paris, 
France; Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France;
(4)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Inserm U1152, Paris, France;
and AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France. (5)Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, Laboratoire Hypoxie & Poumon, Bobigny, France; AP-HP, Hôpital Avicenne,
Bobigny, France; carole.planes@avc.aphp.fr.

Administration of bone marrow-derived human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) reduces
lung inflammation, fibrosis, and mortality in animal models of lung injury, by a 
mechanism not completely understood. We investigated whether hMSC would prevent
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) induced by hypoxia in primary rat
alveolar epithelial cell (AEC). In AEC cultured on semipermeable filters,
prolonged hypoxic exposure (1.5% O2 for up to 12 days) induced phenotypic changes
consistent with EMT, i.e., a change in cell morphology, a decrease in
transepithelial resistance (Rte) and in the expression of epithelial markers
[zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), E-cadherin, AQP-5, TTF-1], together with an increase 
in mesenchymal markers [vimentin, a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA)]. Expression of
transcription factors driving EMT such as SNAIL1, ZEB1, and TWIST1 increased
after 2, 24, and 48 h of hypoxia, respectively. Hypoxia also induced TGF-ß1 mRNA 
expression and the secretion of active TGF-ß1 in apical medium, and the
expression of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), two inducers of EMT.
Coculture of AEC with hMSC partially prevented the decrease in Rte and in ZO-1,
E-cadherin, and TTF-1 expression, and the increase in vimentin expression induced
by hypoxia. It also abolished the increase in TGF-ß1 expression and in
TGF-ß1-induced genes ZEB1, TWIST1, and CTGF. Finally, incubation with human
recombinant KGF at a concentration similar to what was measured in
hMSC-conditioned media restored the expression of TTF-1 and prevented the
increase in TWIST1, TGF-ß1, and CTGF in hypoxic AEC. Our results indicate that
hMSC prevent hypoxia-induced alveolar EMT through the paracrine modulation of EMT
signaling pathways and suggest that this effect is partly mediated by KGF.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26702148  [PubMed - in process]


71. FEBS Open Bio. 2015 Nov 10;5:900-7. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2015.11.001. eCollection
2015.

MicroRNA-431 inhibits migration and invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma cells by
targeting the ZEB1-mediated epithelial-mensenchymal transition.

Sun K(1), Zeng T(2), Huang D(1), Liu Z(3), Huang S(2), Liu J(1), Qu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Taihe Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine,
Shiyan 442000, China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Renmin Hospital,
Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan 442000, China. (3)Zhushan Hospital of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shiyan 442200, China.

MicroRNA-431 (miR-431) has been recognized as an oncogenic miRNA, being
implicated in the initiation and development of human cancers. Recently,
deregulation of miR-431 has been reported in several tumors. However, the
clinical significance of miR-431 and its underlying role in human hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) are poorly explored. Herein, we found that miR-431 expression was
reduced in HCC tissues compared to noncancerous tissues. Otherwise,
down-regulation of miR-431 was observed in aggressive tumor tissues. The levels
of miR-431 expression in HCC cell lines were significantly lower than that in a
nontransformed hepatic cell line. Clinical association analyses disclosed that a 
low level of miR-431 was prominently associated with poor prognostic features of 
HCC including venous infiltration, high Edmondson-Steiner grading and advanced
tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) tumor stage. Our in vitro studies showed that
up-regulation of miR-431 expression reduced cell invasion and migration in HCCLM3
cells. In contrast, down-regulation of miR-431 expression promoted SMMC-7721 cell
invasion and migration. We found that up-regulation of miR-431 expression
decreased zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) expression and inhibited
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) with increased E-cadherin expression 
and decreased vimentin expression in HCCLM3 cells. Otherwise, down-regulation of 
miR-431 expression increased ZEB1 expression and promoted EMT in SMMC-7721 cells.
Significantly, ZEB1 was identified as a target of miR-431 in HCC. ZEB1 knockdown 
abrogated the effect of miR-431 silencing on EMT and cell mobility in SMMC-7721
cells. In conclusion, miR-431 inhibits migration and invasion of HCC cells by
suppressing ZEB1-mediated EMT.

PMCID: PMC4664716
PMID: 26697292  [PubMed]


72. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 22. [Epub ahead of print]

SENP1 regulates hepatocyte growth factor-induced migration and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang W(1), Sun H(2), Shi X(3), Wang H(2), Cui C(2), Xiao F(2), Wu C(2,)(4), Guo 
X(5), Wang L(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shenyang General Hospital of PLA, 83 Wenhua
Road, Shenyang, 110016, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Experimental
Hematology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 100850, People's
Republic of China. (3)Qinghai Provincial People's Hospital, Xining, 810007,
People's Republic of China. (4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. (5)Department
of Gastroenterology, Shenyang General Hospital of PLA, 83 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, 
110016, People's Republic of China. guoxiaozhong1962@163.com. (6)Department of
Experimental Hematology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing,
100850, People's Republic of China. wangls@bmi.ac.cn. (7)Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan,
China. wangls@bmi.ac.cn.

The deregulation of HGF/c-Met signaling is implicated in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and progress of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the
epigenetic mechanisms that HGF/c-Met regulates EMT and metastasis of HCC cells
are less explored. In this study, we demonstrated that HCC cells express a high
level of SUMO/sentrin-specific protease 1 (Senp1) which is induced by HGF/c-Met
signals. Lentivirus-mediated small hairpin RNA (shRNA) transduction results in
Senp1 silence in HCC cells. Senp1 silence reduces the HGF-induced proliferation
and migration of HCC cells. Senp1 inhibition also induces HCC cell apoptosis and 
growth arrest. Furthermore, Senp1 knockdown inhibits epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, with increase of E-cadherin and ZO-1 expression, decrease of
fibronectin and N-cadherin expression. The EMT-related transcription factor Zeb1 
was SUMO-modified and decreased in Senp1-silenced HCC cells. These results
delineate that senp1 might play an important role in the regulation of
HGF-induced invasion and migration of HCC cells.

PMID: 26695141  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


73. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 18. [Epub ahead of print]

KRAS mutations in pancreatic circulating tumor cells: a pilot study.

Kulemann B(1), Liss AS(2), Warshaw AL(2), Seifert S(3), Bronsert P(4,)(5), Glatz 
T(3), Pitman MB(6), Hoeppner J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Freiburg Medical Center, Hugstetter Str. 
55, D-79106, Freiburg, Germany. birte.kulemann@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Department of Surgery & Andrew L. Warshaw, MD Institute for Pancreatic Cancer 
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital/ Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA. (3)Department of Surgery, University of Freiburg Medical Center, Hugstetter 
Str. 55, D-79106, Freiburg, Germany. (4)Department of Pathology, University of
Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. (6)Department of
Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is most often diagnosed in a metastatic
stage. Circulating tumor cells (CTC) in the blood are hypothesized as the means
of systemic dissemination. We aimed to isolate and characterize CTC to evaluate
their significance as prognostic markers in PDAC. Blood obtained from healthy
donors and patients with PDAC before therapy was filtered with ScreenCell®
filtration devices for size-based CTC isolation. Captured cells were analyzed by 
immunofluorescence for an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) marker (zinc
finger E-box binding homebox 1 (ZEB1)) and an epithelial antigen (cytokeratin
(CK)). Molecular analysis of parallel specimens evaluated the KRAS mutation
status of the CTC. The survival of each patient after study was recorded. As
demonstrated by either cytology or finding of a KRAS mutation, CTC were detected 
in 18 of 21 patients (86 %) with proven PDAC: 8 out of 10 patients (80 %) with
early stage (UICC IIA/IIB) and 10 out of 11 (91 %) with late stage (UICC III/IV) 
disease. CTC were not found in any of the 10 control patients (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). The
presence of CTC did not adversely affect median survival: 16 months in
CTC-positive (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>18) vs. 10 months in CTC-negative (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>3) patients. Neither
ZEB1 nor cytological characteristics correlated with overall survival, although
ZEB1 was found almost exclusively in CTC of patients with established metastases.
Patients with a CTC KRAS mutation (CTC-KRAS (mut)) had a substantially better
survival, 19.4 vs. 7.4 months than patients with wild type KRAS (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015). With
ScreenCell filtration, CTC are commonly found in PDAC (86 %). Molecular and
genetic characterization, including mutations such as KRAS, may prove useful for 
prognosis.

PMID: 26684803  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


74. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 17;10(12):e0145198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145198.
eCollection 2015.

Role of Epithelial-Mesenchyme Transition in Chlamydia Pathogenesis.

Igietseme JU(1,)(2), Omosun Y(1,)(2), Stuchlik O(1), Reed MS(1), Partin J(1), He 
Q(1,)(2), Joseph K(1), Ellerson D(1), Bollweg B(1), George Z(1), Eko FO(2),
Bandea C(1), Liu H(1), Yang G(1), Shieh WJ(1), Pohl J(1), Karem K(1), Black
CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Emerging Zoonotic and Infectious Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control & Prevention (CDC) Atlanta, GA 30333 United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30310 United States of America.

Chlamydia trachomatis genital infection in women causes serious adverse
reproductive complications, and is a strong co-factor for human papilloma virus
(HPV)-associated cervical epithelial carcinoma. We tested the hypothesis that
Chlamydia induces epithelial-mesenchyme transition (EMT) involving T cell-derived
TNF-alpha signaling, caspase activation, cleavage inactivation of dicer and
dysregulation of micro-RNA (miRNA) in the reproductive epithelium; the pathologic
process of EMT causes fibrosis and fertility-related epithelial dysfunction, and 
also provides the co-factor function for HPV-related cervical epithelial
carcinoma. Using a combination of microarrays, immunohistochemistry and
proteomics, we showed that chlamydia altered the expression of crucial miRNAs
that control EMT, fibrosis and tumorigenesis; specifically, miR-15a, miR-29b,
miR-382 and MiR-429 that maintain epithelial integrity were down-regulated, while
miR-9, mi-R-19a, miR-22 and miR-205 that promote EMT, fibrosis and tumorigenesis 
were up-regulated. Chlamydia induced EMT in vitro and in vivo, marked by the
suppression of normal epithelial cell markers especially E-cadherin but
up-regulation of mesenchymal markers of pathological EMT, including T-cadherin,
MMP9, and fibronectin. Also, Chlamydia upregulated pro-EMT regulators, including 
the zinc finger E-box binding homeobox protein, ZEB1, Snail1/2, and
thrombospondin1 (Thbs1), but down-regulated anti-EMT and fertility promoting
proteins (i.e., the major gap junction protein connexin 43 (Cx43), Mets1,
Add1Scarb1 and MARCKSL1). T cell-derived TNF-alpha signaling was required for
chlamydial-induced infertility and caspase inhibitors prevented both infertility 
and EMT. Thus, chlamydial-induced T cell-derived TNF-alpha activated caspases
that inactivated dicer, causing alteration in the expression of reproductive
epithelial miRNAs and induction of EMT. EMT causes epithelial malfunction,
fibrosis, infertility, and the enhancement of tumorigenesis of HPV
oncogene-transformed epithelial cells. These findings provide a novel
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of chlamydia-associated diseases,
which may guide a rational prevention strategy.

PMCID: PMC4683008
PMID: 26681200  [PubMed - in process]


75. Exp Eye Res. 2016 Jan;142:26-31. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.02.008.

Role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in proliferative vitreoretinopathy.

Tamiya S(1), Kaplan HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville, 301
E. Muhammad Ali Boulevard, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic address:
shigeo.tamiya@louisville.edu. (2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Louisville, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Boulevard, Louisville, KY 40202,
USA. Electronic address: hank.kaplan@louisville.edu.

Proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) is a potentially blinding fibrotic
complication. It is caused by the formation and contraction of epiretinal
membranes (ERMs) that ultimately lead to retinal folds and traction retinal
detachments. While multiple cell types have been identified in ERMs, retinal
pigment epithelial (RPE) cells have long been implicated as a key player in the
pathophysiology of PVR. Clinical and experimental evidence has shown that RPE
cells undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to adopt a fibroblastic
phenotype. Cell-cell adhesions maintained by adherens and tight junctions are
important for the maintenance of RPE phenotype, and disruption of these
junctional complexes results in EMT via activation of signaling pathways such as 
ß-catenin/Wnt and Hippo signaling, as well as transcription factors involving
Zeb1, Snail, and ZONAB. Upon EMT, RPE cells can further differentiate into
myofibroblasts in the presence of TGF-ß with cytoskeletal tension mediated by
RhoGTPase. These fibroblasts and myofibroblasts derived from RPE cells can
contribute to ERM formation by cell migration, proliferation and matrix
modification, and play a key role in ERM contraction. It is not solely the
proliferation of these cells that results in PVR but rather the contraction of
these cells in the ERM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26675400  [PubMed - in process]


76. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Dec 15. pii: jclinpath-2015-203115. doi:
10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203115. [Epub ahead of print]

ZEB1 expression is associated with prognosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Terashita K(1), Chuma M(2), Hatanaka Y(3), Hatanaka K(3), Mitsuhashi T(3), Yokoo 
H(4), Ohmura T(5), Ishizu H(6), Muraoka S(7), Nagasaka A(8), Tsuji T(9), Yamamoto
Y(10), Kurauchi N(11), Shimoyama N(12), Toyoda H(13), Kumada T(13), Kaneoka
Y(14), Maeda A(14), Ogawa K(1), Natsuizaka M(1), Kamachi H(4), Kakisaka T(4),
Kamiyama T(4), Taketomi A(4), Matsuno Y(3), Sakamoto N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido University Hospital, 
Sapporo, Japan. (2)Departments of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido
University Hospital, Sapporo, Japan Gastroenterological Center, Yokohama City
University Medical Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Department of Surgical
Pathology, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo, Japan. (4)Department of
Gastroenterological Surgery I, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Sapporo-Kosei General Hospital, Sapporo,
Japan. (6)Department of Surgery, Sapporo-Kosei General Hospital, Sapporo, Japan. 
(7)Department of Pathology, Sapporo-Kosei General Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Sapporo Municipal Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.
(9)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Municipal Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Hakodate Municipal Hospital, Hakodate, Japan.
(11)Department of Surgery, Hakodate Municipal Hospital, Hakodate, Japan.
(12)Department of Pathology, Hakodate Municipal Hospital, Hakodate, Japan.
(13)Departments of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ogaki Municipal Hospital,
Ogaki, Japan. (14)Department of Surgery, Ogaki Municipal Hospital, Ogaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is one of the most
aggressive malignant tumours, so the identification of molecular targets for ICC 
is an important issue. Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a key
inducer of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The aim of the present study 
was to clarify the clinical significance of ZEB1 in ICC and the associations
between ZEB1 expression and EMT-related proteins.
METHODS: We immunohistochemically examined the expression of EMT-related
proteins, namely ZEB1, vimentin and E-cadherin, in ICC specimens from 102
patients. The clinicopathological and prognostic values of these markers were
evaluated.
RESULTS: ZEB1 and vimentin were expressed in 46.1% and 43.1% of tumours,
respectively, and E-cadherin expression was lost in 44.1% of tumours. ZEB1
expression showed a significant inverse correlation with E-cadherin expression
(p=0.004) and a positive correlation with vimentin expression (p=0.022). Altered 
expression of ZEB1 was associated with aggressive tumour characteristics,
including advanced tumour stage (p=0.037), undifferentiated-type histology
(p=0.017), lymph node metastasis (p=0.024) and portal vein invasion (p=0.037).
Moreover, overall survival rates were significantly lower for patients with high 
ZEB1 expression than for patients with low ZEB1 expression (p=0.027).
Kaplan-Meier analysis also identified E-cadherin expression (p=0.041) and
vimentin expression (p=0.049) as prognostic indicators for overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: ZEB1 expression is associated with tumour progression and poor
prognosis in patients with ICC through positive correlations with vimentin and
negative correlations with E-cadherin. ZEB1 expression is associated with a poor 
prognosis and might be an attractive target for the treatment of ICC.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26670746  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


77. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2016 Mar;33(3):239-48. doi: 10.1007/s10585-015-9773-7. Epub 
2015 Dec 14.

Epithelial mesenchymal-like transition occurs in a subset of cells in castration 
resistant prostate cancer bone metastases.

Haider M(1), Zhang X(1), Coleman I(2), Ericson N(3), True LD(4), Lam HM(1), Brown
LG(1), Ketchanji M(1), Nghiem B(1), Lakely B(1), Coleman R(2), Montgomery B(5),
Lange PH(1,)(6), Roudier M(1), Higano CS(1,)(5), Bielas JH(2,)(3,)(4), Nelson
PS(2,)(5), Vessella RL(1,)(6), Morrissey C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Genitourinary Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Urology, University of
Washington, Box 356510, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA. (2)Divison of Human Biology,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA. (3)Divison of Public
Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Genitourinary Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Urology, University of
Washington, Box 356510, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA. cmorriss@u.washington.edu.

TGFß is a known driver of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) which is
associated with tumor aggressiveness and metastasis. However, EMT has not been
fully explored in clinical specimens of castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) metastases. To assess EMT in CRPC, gene expression analysis was performed 
on 149 visceral and bone metastases from 62 CRPC patients and immunohistochemical
analysis was performed on 185 CRPC bone and visceral metastases from 42 CRPC
patients. In addition, to assess the potential of metastases to seed further
metastases the mitochondrial genome was sequenced at different metastatic sites
in one patient. TGFß was increased in bone versus visceral metastases. While
primarily cytoplasmic; nuclear and cytoplasmic Twist were significantly higher in
bone than in visceral metastases. Slug and Zeb1 were unchanged, with the
exception of nuclear Zeb1 being significantly higher in visceral metastases.
Importantly, nuclear Twist, Slug, and Zeb1 were only present in a subset of
epithelial cells that had an EMT-like phenotype. Underscoring the relevance of
EMT-like cells, mitochondrial sequencing revealed that metastases could seed
additional metastases in the same patient. In conclusion, while TGFß expression
and EMT-associated protein expression is present in a considerable number of CRPC
visceral and bone metastases, nuclear Twist, Slug, and Zeb1 localization and an
EMT-like phenotype (elongated nuclei and cytoplasmic compartment) was only
present in a small subset of CRPC bone metastases. Mitochondrial sequencing from 
different metastases in a CRPC patient provided evidence for the seeding of
metastases from previously established metastases, highlighting the biological
relevance of EMT-like behavior in CRPC metastases.

PMCID: PMC4777655 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26667932  [PubMed - in process]


78. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:5831276. doi: 10.1155/2016/5831276. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

Ciprofloxacin Improves the Stemness of Human Dermal Papilla Cells.

Kiratipaiboon C(1), Tengamnuay P(2), Chanvorachote P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Technology (International) Program, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. (2)Department of
Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. (3)Department of Pharmacology 
and Physiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok 10330, Thailand ; Cell-Based Drug and Health Product Development Research
Unit, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.

Improvement in the expansion method of adult stem cells may augment their use in 
regenerative therapy. Using human dermal papilla cell line as well as primary
dermal papilla cells as model systems, the present study demonstrated that
ciprofloxacin treatment could prevent the loss of stemness during culture.
Clonogenicity and stem cell markers of dermal papilla cells were shown to
gradually decrease in the culture in a time-dependent manner. Treatment of the
cells with nontoxic concentrations of ciprofloxacin could maintain both stem cell
morphology and clonogenicity, as well as all stem cells markers. We found that
ciprofloxacin exerted its effect through ATP-dependent tyrosine kinase/glycogen
synthase kinase3ß dependent mechanism which in turn upregulated ß-catenin.
Besides, ciprofloxacin was shown to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
DPCs as the transcription factors ZEB1 and Snail were significantly increased.
Furthermore, the self-renewal proteins of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, namely, Nanog
and Oct-4 were significantly upregulated in the ciprofloxacin-treated cells. The 
effects of ciprofloxacin in preserving stem cell features were confirmed in the
primary dermal papilla cells directly obtained from human hair follicles.
Together, these results revealed a novel application of ciprofloxacin for stem
cell maintenance and provided the underlying mechanisms that are responsible for 
the stemness in dermal papilla cells.

PMCID: PMC4663358
PMID: 26649051  [PubMed]


79. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12;7(2):1741-53. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6480.

Epigenetic regulation of ZEB1-RAB25/ESRP1 axis plays a critical role in
phenylbutyrate treatment-resistant breast cancer.

Kikuchi M(1), Yamashita K(1,)(2), Waraya M(1), Minatani N(1), Ushiku H(1), Kojo
K(1), Ema A(1), Kosaka Y(1), Katoh H(1), Sengoku N(1), Enomoto T(1), Tanino H(1),
Sawanobori M(2), Watanabe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan. (2)Epigenetic Treatment Research Group, Japan.

Phenylbutyrate (PB) is a histone deacetylase antagonist that also exhibits
antitumor activity. In this study, we used 7 breast cancer cell lines to identify
biomarker candidates that predict PB sensitivity in breast cancer.Comprehensive
gene expression profiles were compared using microarrays, and the importance of
the identified genes to PB sensitivity was confirmed in gene transfection
experiments. CRL and MDAMB453 cells were identified as PB-sensitive, while
MDAMB231 cells were PB-resistant.RAB25 and ESRP1 were identified as key
regulators of PB sensitivity, while ANKD1, ETS1, PTRF, IFI16 and KIAA1199 acted
as PB resistance-related genes. Expression of these genes was dramatically
altered by DNA demethylation treatments. RAB25 expression inhibited IFI16 and
PTRF, while ESRP1 expression suppressed ANKRD1, ETS1, and KIAA1199. Both RAB25
and ESRP1 were suppressed by ZEB1, which was in turn regulated via epigenetic
mechanisms. Thus, PB sensitivity is influenced by epigenetic expression
alteration of ZEB1. The genes associated with PB sensitivity are downstream
targets of ZEB1. Epigenetic regulation of ZEB1 may prove valuable as a critical
biomarker for predicting resistance to breast cancer therapies.

PMID: 26646320  [PubMed - in process]


80. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Promoter-associated endogenous and exogenous small RNAs suppress human bladder
cancer cell metastasis by activating p21 (CIP1/WAF1) expression.

Wang C(1,)(2), Ge Q(1), Chen Z(3), Hu J(1), Li F(1), Ye Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, No. 1095 Jie Fang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030,
Hubei, China. (2)Department of Urology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated 
Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai, 200233, China.
(3)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, No. 1095 Jie Fang Avenue, Wuhan, 430030,
Hubei, China. chenzhongtongji@126.com.

Accumulating data suggest that micro RNAs (miRNAs) or double-stranded RNAs
(dsRNAs) can activate gene expression by targeting promoters. The
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 (CIP1/WAF1) (p21) has also been shown to
suppress epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) which plays a crucial role in
the early stage of tumor metastases and invasiveness. In a previous study, we
have reported that miR-370-5p is low-expressed in bladder cancer (BCa) tissues
and cell lines. Here, we identified that miR-370-5p and sequence homology dsRNA
(dsP21-555) fully complementary to promoter hold the potent abilities to induce
p21 expression. Moreover, transfection of miR-370-5p or dsP21-555 into BCa cells 
remarkably inverts EMT-associated genes (increases epithelial cell makers
E-cadherin and ß-catenin, and decreases mesenchymal cell markers ZEB1 and
Vimentin) expression mainly via regulating p21 expression. Besides, through
manipulating p21, both the candidates can retard BCa cell migration and invasion.
In summary, our results provide evidence that both endogenous and exogenous small
RNAs may function to induce p21 expression by interacting with the similar
promoter region and impede BCa metastasis.

PMID: 26643891  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


81. Cell Microbiol. 2015 Dec 7. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12554. [Epub ahead of print]

Porphyromonas gingivalis initiates a mesenchymal-like transition through ZEB1 in 
gingival epithelial cells.

Sztukowska MN(1), Ojo A(1), Ahmed S(1), Carenbauer AL(1), Wang Q(1), Shumway
B(2), Jenkinson HF(3), Wang H(1), Darling DS(1), Lamont RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases. (2)Department of
Surgical and Hospital Dentistry, University of Louisville School of Dentistry,
Louisville, Kentucky, USA. (3)School of Oral and Dental Sciences, University of
Bristol, Bristol, UK.

The oral anaerobe Porphyromonas gingivalis is associated with the development of 
cancers including oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Here we show that
infection of gingival epithelial cells with P. gingivalis induces expression and 
nuclear localization of the ZEB1 transcription factor which controls
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). P. gingivalis also caused an increase in
ZEB1 expression as a dual species community with Fusobacterium nucleatum or
Streptococcus gordonii. Increased ZEB1 expression was associated with elevated
ZEB1 promoter activity and did not require suppression of the miR-200 family of
micro RNAs. P. gingivalis strains lacking the FimA fimbrial protein were
attenuated in their ability to induce ZEB1 expression. ZEB1 levels correlated
with an increase in expression of mesenchymal markers, including vimentin and
MMP-9, and with enhanced migration of epithelial cells into matrigel. Knockdown
of ZEB1 with siRNA prevented the P. gingivalis-induced increase in mesenchymal
markers and epithelial cell migration. Oral infection of mice by P. gingivalis
increased ZEB1 levels in gingival tissues, and intracellular P. gingivalis were
detected by antibody staining in biopsy samples from OSCC. These findings
indicate that FimA-driven ZEB1 expression could provide a mechanistic basis for a
P. gingivalis contribution to OSCC. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26639759  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


82. Neoplasma. 2016;63(1):44-56. doi: 10.4149/neo_2016_006.

MAGE-A is frequently expressed in triple negative breast cancer and associated
with epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Wang H, Sang M, Geng C, Liu F, Gu L, Shan B.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial step in tumor metastasis.
Triple negative (TN) breast cancer, a high metastasis phenotype, has been
verified to be associated with EMT. Melanoma associated antigen-A (MAGE-A) is
exclusively expressed in cancers with high aggressiveness as well as unfavorable 
prognosis and likely to be associated with EMT of triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC). The aim of the study is to analyze the expression profile of MAGE-A in
breast cancer and the correlation between MAGE-A and EMT of TNBC.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to assess the prevalence of MAGE-A,
vimentin, E-cadherin and ß-catenin in breast cancer tissues and correlate them
with clinical pathological parameters. The association between MAGE-A and EMT
markers was also evaluated. Scratch assay and transwell invasion assay were
carried out to evaluate the impact of MAGE-A down-regulation on migration and
invasion of the breast cancer cells. Real-time PCR was also conducted to evaluate
alterations in EMT markers with decrease in MAGE-A. The results showed that
MAGE-A was absent in normal tissue but expressed in tumor samples with the
incidence of 49.17% (P=0.008). MAGE-A staining was higher in TNBC (76.47%,
13/17), followed by HER-2(+) (53.85%, 7/13) and Luminal set (43.33%, 39/90), and 
it was significantly correlated with ER (-), PR (-), HER-2 (-), lymph nodes
involvement and higher histological grade (P<0.05). E-cadherin-positivity was
frequent in Luminal set (94.44%, 85/90) and linked to ER (+), negative lymph
nodes and lower histological grade (P<0.05). Vimentin expression was often
observed in TNBC (70.56%, 12/17) and ER (-), PR (-), lymph nodes (+) groups
(P<0.05). Expression of ß-catenin was prevalent in Luminal set (93.33%, 84/90)
and correlated with ER (+), PR (+) and lower histological grade (P<0.05). MAGE-A 
was inversely associated with E-cadherin (P=0.011) and ß-catenin (P=0.048) but
expressed in the same trend with vimentin (P=0.000). Migration and invasion of
MDA-MB-231 were inhibited when MAGE-A decreased. Increase in epithelial markers
and decline in mesenchymal indicators were also seen with MAGE-A reduction.
Snail, Slug, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were also down-regulated. In conclusion, MAGE-A may be
responsible for high aggressiveness and EMT of TNBC and can be a new choice for
targeted therapy.

PMID: 26639233  [PubMed - in process]


83. Phytomedicine. 2015 Dec 15;22(14):1269-78. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.11.002.
Epub 2015 Nov 14.

Glycyrrhizic acid attenuates stem cell-like phenotypes of human dermal papilla
cells.

Kiratipaiboon C(1), Tengamnuay P(2), Chanvorachote P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Technology (International) Program, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. (2)Department of
Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. (3)Department of Pharmacology 
and Physiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok 10330, Thailand ; Cell-Based Drug and Health Product Development Research
Unit, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand. Electronic address: pithi.c@chula.ac.th.

BACKGROUND: Although the growth of unwanted hair or hirsutism is a harmless
condition, many people find it bothersome and embarrassing. Maintaining stem cell
features of dermal papilla cells is a critical biological process that keeps the 
high rate of hair growth. Glycyrrhizic acid has been reported to impair hair
growth in some studies; however, its underlying mechanism has not yet been
investigated.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to explore the effect and underlying mechanism of
glycyrrhizic acid on stemness of human dermal papilla cells.
STUDY DESIGN/METHODS: The stem cell molecular markers, epithelial to mesenchymal 
markers and Wnt/ß-catenin-associated proteins of human dermal papilla cell line
and primary human dermal papilla cells were analysed by western blot analysis and
immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: The present study demonstrated that glycyrrhizic acid significantly
depressed the stemness of dermal papilla cells in dose- and time-dependent
manners. Clonogenicity and stem cell markers in the glycyrrhizic acid-treated
cells were found to gradually decrease in the culture in a time-dependent manner.
Our results demonstrated that glycyrrhizic acid exerted the stem cell suppressing
effects through the interruption of ATP-dependent tyrosine kinase/glycogen
synthase kinase3ß-dependent mechanism which in turn down-regulated the ß-catenin 
signalling pathway, coupled with decreased its down-stream epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and self-renewal transcription factors, namely, Oct-4, Nanog, Sox2,
ZEB1 and Snail. The effect of glycyrrhizic acid on the reduction of stem cell
features was also observed in the primary dermal papilla cells directly obtained 
from human hair follicles.
CONCLUSION: These results revealed a novel molecular mechanism of glycyrrhizic
acid in regulation of dermal papilla cells and provided the evidence supporting
the use of this compound in suppressing the growth of unwanted hair.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26626191  [PubMed - in process]


84. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 2;5:17595. doi: 10.1038/srep17595.

Screening cell mechanotype by parallel microfiltration.

Qi D(1), Kaur Gill N(1), Santiskulvong C(2), Sifuentes J(2), Dorigo O(3), Rao
J(2), Taylor-Harding B(4), Ruprecht Wiedemeyer W(4,)(5), Rowat AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division Gynecologic Oncology,
Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University, USA. (4)Women's Cancer Program,
Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, USA. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, USA.

Cell mechanical phenotype or 'mechanotype' is emerging as a valuable label-free
biomarker. For example, marked changes in the viscoelastic characteristics of
cells occur during malignant transformation and cancer progression. Here we
describe a simple and scalable technique to measure cell mechanotype: this
parallel microfiltration assay enables multiple samples to be simultaneously
measured by driving cell suspensions through porous membranes. To validate the
method, we compare the filtration of untransformed and HRas(V12)-transformed
murine ovary cells and find significantly increased deformability of the
transformed cells. Inducing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human
ovarian cancer cells by overexpression of key transcription factors (Snail, Slug,
Zeb1) or by acquiring drug resistance produces a similar increase in
deformability. Mechanistically, we show that EMT-mediated changes in epithelial
(loss of E-Cadherin) and mesenchymal markers (vimentin induction) correlate with 
altered mechanotype. Our results demonstrate a method to screen cell mechanotype 
that has potential for broader clinical application.

PMCID: PMC4667223
PMID: 26626154  [PubMed - in process]


85. Infect Agent Cancer. 2015 Nov 30;10:42. doi: 10.1186/s13027-015-0037-6.
eCollection 2015.

miR-23b as a potential tumor suppressor and its regulation by DNA methylation in 
cervical cancer.

Campos-Viguri GE(1), Jiménez-Wences H(1), Peralta-Zaragoza O(2),
Torres-Altamirano G(1), Soto-Flores DG(1), Hernández-Sotelo D(3), Alarcón-Romero 
Ldel C(4), Jiménez-López MA(5), Illades-Aguiar B(6), Fernández-Tilapa G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Investigación Clínica, Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Av. Lázaro Cárdenas S/N, Ciudad
Universitaria, Colonia La Haciendita, C.P. 39089 Chilpancingo, Guerrero México.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública, Avenida Universidad No. 655, Colonia,
Santa María Ahuacatitlán, Cuernavaca, Morelos C.P. 62100 México. (3)Laboratorio
de Virología y Epigenética del Cáncer, Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Av. Lázaro Cárdenas S/N, Ciudad
Universitaria, Colonia La Haciendita, C.P. 39089 Chilpancingo, Guerrero México.
(4)Laboratorio de Investigación en Citopatología e Histoquímica, Unidad Académica
de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Av. Lázaro
Cárdenas S/N, Ciudad Universitaria, Colonia La Haciendita, C.P. 39089
Chilpancingo, Guerrero México. (5)Instituto Estatal de Cancerología "Dr. Arturo
Beltrán Ortega", Av. Adolfo Ruiz Cortines No. 128-A, Colonia Alta Progreso,
Acapulco de Juárez, Guerrero C.P. 39570 México. (6)Laboratorio de Biomedicina
Molecular, Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma 
de Guerrero, Av. Lázaro Cárdenas S/N, Ciudad Universitaria, Colonia La
Haciendita, Chilpancingo, Guerrero C.P. 39089 México.

BACKGROUND: The aberrant expression of miR-23b is involved in the development and
progression of cancer. The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential role
of methylation in the silencing of miR-23b in cervical cancer cell lines and to
determine its expression in stages of malignant progression and in cervical
cancer tissues HPV16-positive.
METHODS: The methylation of the miR-23b promoter was determined in HeLa, SiHa,
CaSki and C33A cells using a Human Cancer miRNA EpiTectMethyl II Signature PCR
Array®. The cells were treated with 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine, and the expression of
miR-23b, uPa, c-Met and Zeb1 was determined by qRT-PCR. miR-92a and GAPDH were
used as controls. The expression of miR-23b was determined in cervical scrapes
and biopsies of women without squamous intraepithelial lesions, with precursor
lesions and with cervical cancer, all were HPV16-positive. The Fisher exact and
Mann-Whitney tests were used to compare the differences of the expression of
miR-23b, uPa, c-Met and Zeb1 among cell groups, and the difference among
patients, respectively. The association between the expression of miR-23b and
cervical cancer was determined by logistic regression with a confidence level of 
95 %. A value of p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: In C33A, HeLa and CaSki cells, methylation was associated with decreased
expression of miR-23b. After treatment with 5-Aza-CdR, the expression of miR-23b 
increased in all cell lines and the expression of c-Met decreased in HeLa cells, 
while uPa and Zeb1 decreased in C33A and CaSki cells. In SiHa cells the
expression of uPa, c-Met and Zeb1 increased. The expression of miR-23b decreased 
in relation to the increase in the severity of the lesion and was significantly
lower in cervical cancer. In women with premalignant lesions HPV16-positive,
decreased levels of miR-23b increased the risk of cervical cancer (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>36, 95 % 
CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.7-192.6, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the expression of miR-23b is regulated by
the methylation of its promoter and is possible that this microRNA influence the 
expression of uPa, c-Met and Zeb1 in cervical cancer cells lines. In women with
premalignant lesions and cervical cancer infected with HPV16, the expression
level of miR-23b agree with a tumor suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC4663735
PMID: 26622315  [PubMed]


86. Mol Vis. 2015 Oct 30;21:1252-60. eCollection 2015.

Association of ZEB1 and TCF4 rs613872 changes with late onset Fuchs endothelial
corneal dystrophy in patients from northern India.

Gupta R(1), Kumawat BL(2), Paliwal P(1), Tandon R(2), Sharma N(2), Sen S(2),
Kashyap S(2), Nag TC(1), Vajpayee RB(3), Sharma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, AIIMS, New Delhi, India. (2)Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre
for Ophthalmic Sciences, AIIMS, New Delhi, India. (3)Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre
for Ophthalmic Sciences, AIIMS, New Delhi, India ; Center for Eye Research,
Australia, Northwest Academic Centre, University of Melbourne, Australia.

PURPOSE: Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) results in loss of vision
associated with progressive corneal edema and loss of corneal transparency. The
aim of the study was to evaluate changes in ZEB1, COL8A2, SLC4A11, and TCF4
rs613872 and correlate them with clinical findings.
METHODS: Eighty-two patients with clinically diagnosed FECD and 143 controls were
recruited during the period 2007-2012. Clinical details, pedigree information up 
to three generations, and 5 ml of blood samples were collected. Histopathological
and transmission electron microscopy studies were performed on host corneal
buttons from patients who underwent keratoplasty. Genomic DNA from blood was
processed for PCR amplification followed by direct sequencing to screen genetic
changes in the candidate genes. The pathogenic nature of the genetic variants was
assessed using Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) and MutationTaster.
RESULTS: The mean age at the onset of symptoms was 59.14±1.41years, the male to
female ratio was 1:1.5, and the mean specular count (endothelial cell density)
was 1629±93.62 cells/mm(2) with a mean central corneal thickness (CCT) of
617.30±15.73 µm. ZEB1 showed a novel variant IVS2+276 C/T in 14% of the cases, a 
novel nonsense p.Leu947stop mutation in one patient, two novel missense mutations
(p.Glu733Lys, p.Ala818Val) in one patient each, and one novel synonymous
variation (p.Ser234Ser) in two patients. Reported mutation p.Gln840Pro and five
polymorphisms were also identified. The TCF4 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs613872 was significantly higher in patients with FECD.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of genetic variations in ZEB1 and TCF4 SNP 
rs613872 in patients with FECD from northern India that suggests a possible role 
in disease pathogenesis and the regulation of endothelial cell density.

PMCID: PMC4638277
PMID: 26622166  [PubMed - in process]


87. Cornea. 2016 Feb;35(2):281-5. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000000670.

Congenital Corneal Endothelial Dystrophies Resulting From Novel De Novo
Mutations.

Cunnusamy K(1), Bowman CB, Beebe W, Gong X, Hogan RN, Mootha VV.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX; Cornea Associates of Texas, Dallas, TX; and McDermott Center for
Human Growth and Development/Center for Human Genetics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX.

PURPOSE: To describe 2 cases of congenital corneal endothelial edema resulting
from novel de novo mutations.
METHODS: Case A patient was a 15-month-old white child and case B patient was a
3-year-old Hispanic child presenting with bilateral cloudy corneas since birth.
Clinicopathologic findings are presented. DNA samples were screened for mutations
in candidate genes by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: Slit-lamp examination of case A patient revealed stromal edema and haze.
Histology of the keratoplasty button showed stromal thickening with loss of
endothelium and thin Descemet membrane. Sanger sequencing established the
diagnosis of congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy by detection of a
compound heterozygous mutation in SLC4A11. The proband displayed a novel de novo 
frameshift mutation in one SLC4A11 allele, p.(Pro817Argfs*32), in conjunction
with a maternally inherited missense mutation in SLC4A11, p.(Arg869His). Case B
patient similarly presented with stromal edema and stromal haze. Histopathologic 
analysis revealed a spongy epithelium, focal discontinuities in Bowman layer,
stromal thickening with areas of compacted posterior stroma, variable thickness
of Descemet membrane, and regional multilayered endothelium. Sanger sequencing
found a novel de novo nonsense mutation in the first exon of ZEB1, p.(Cys7*).
CONCLUSIONS: To the authors' knowledge, we report the earliest clinical
presentation of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy resulting from a de novo
mutation in ZEB1. Additionally, we present a congenital hereditary endothelial
dystrophy case with a thin Descemet membrane with a novel compound heterozygous
SLC4A11 mutation. In the absence of a family history or consanguinity, de novo
mutations may result in congenital corneal endothelial dystrophies.

PMCID: PMC4706791 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26619383  [PubMed - in process]


88. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):11871-6. eCollection 2015.

Expression of long non-coding RNA ZEB1-AS1 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 
and its correlation with tumor progression and patient survival.

Wang YL(1), Bai Y(2), Yao WJ(1), Guo L(1), Wang ZM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang
Medical University Weihui 453100, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Xinxiang
Medical University Xinxiang 453000, China.

BACKGROUND: LncRNA ZEB1-AS1 has been identified as a tumor oncogene in
hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the clinical significance in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is still unknown. The aim of this study was to
explore ZEB1-AS1 expression levels and evaluated its clinical significance in
ESCC patients.
METHODS: LNCRNA ZEB1-AS1 expression was determined by quantitative real-time PCR 
(QRT-PCR) in 87 pairs of ESCC specimens and adjacent non-tumor tissues. Then, the
association of ZEB1-AS1 expression with clinicopathological factors or survival
of ESCC patients were determined.
RESULTS: LNCRNA ZEB1-AS1 was found up-regulated in ESCC tissues compared to
adjacent non-tumor tissues. Increased lncRNA ZEB1-AS1 expression was
significantly associated with tumor grade, depth of invasion, and lymph node
metastasis. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that ESCC patients with high ZEB1-AS1 
expression had a poorer overall survival and disease-free survival. Furthermore, 
multivariate analysis suggested that ZEB1-AS1 expression was identified as an
independent prognostic factor in patients with ESCC.
CONCLUSION: These results indicated that lncRNA ZEB1-AS1 was associated with
tumor progression and could be an independent prognostic factor for ESCC
patients.

PMCID: PMC4637758
PMID: 26617942  [PubMed - in process]


89. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):11258-67. eCollection 2015.

ZEB1 promotes the progression and metastasis of cervical squamous cell carcinoma 
via the promotion of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Ma Y(1), Zheng X(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang Y(2), Chen K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, 1st Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou 450052, China ; Henan Key Laboratory for Tumour Pathology, Zhengzhou
University Zhengzhou 450052, China. (2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
1st Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University Zhengzhou 450052, China.

OBJECTIVE: The process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) clearly
contributes to cancer metastasis. The aim of this study was to investigate the
expression of the EMT-related transcription repressor ZEB1 and the expression of 
EMT-associated markers (E-cadherin, ß-catenin and N-cadherin) in cervical
squamous cell carcinoma. In addition, the role of ZEB1 and these EMT-associated
markers in the progression and metastasis of cervical squamous cell carcinoma was
explored.
METHODS: The expression of ZEB1, E-cadherin, ß-catenin and N-cadherin was
evaluated in 81 specimens of cervical squamous cell carcinoma by
immunohistochemistry; the clinicopathological significance of these markers was
then analyzed.
RESULTS: 1) Of the 81 samples, 37 cases (45.7%) were positive for ZEB1, and
nuclear expression of ZEB1 in tumor cells was positively associated with the
differentiation status of the tumor tissue (P < 0.05), vascular invasion (P <
0.05) and lymph node metastasis (P < 0.05). 2) The loss of E-cadherin and
ß-catenin expression in tumor cells and the acquisition of N-cadherin expression 
were positively associated with the differentiation status of the tumor tissue (P
< 0.05) and with the occurrence of vascular invasion (P < 0.05). 3) A significant
negative correlation was observed between ZEB1 and E-cadherin expression
(Spearman = -0.636, P < 0.05) and between ZEB1 and ß-catenin expression (Spearman
= -0.417, P < 0.05). Moreover, a significant positive correlation was observed
between ZEB1 and N-cadherin expression (Spearman = 0.557, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These results emphasize the role of EMT in cervical squamous cell
carcinoma. The upregulation of ZEB1 is associated with the abnormal expression of
E-cadherin, ß-catenin and N-cadherin, which might promote the progression and
metastasis of cervical squamous cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4637665
PMID: 26617850  [PubMed - in process]


90. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Feb;14(2):216-27. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0285. Epub
2015 Nov 25.

Differential Regulation of ZEB1 and EMT by MAPK-Interacting Protein Kinases (MNK)
and eIF4E in Pancreatic Cancer.

Kumar K(1), Chow CR(2), Ebine K(1), Arslan AD(2), Kwok B(3), Bentrem DJ(4),
Eckerdt FD(5), Platanias LC(6), Munshi HG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, Illinois. Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, Illinois. The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (3)Department of Medicine, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (4)Jesse Brown VA
Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois. The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. Department of Surgery,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (5)The
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois. (6)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois. Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois. 
The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University,
Chicago, Illinois. (7)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. Jesse Brown VA Medical Center,
Chicago, Illinois. The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. h-munshi@northwestern.edu.

Human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tumors are associated with
dysregulation of mRNA translation. In this report, it is demonstrated that PDAC
cells grown in collagen exhibit increased activation of the MAPK-interacting
protein kinases (MNK) that mediate eIF4E phosphorylation. Pharmacologic and
genetic targeting of MNKs reverse epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
decrease cell migration, and reduce protein expression of the EMT-regulator ZEB1 
without affecting ZEB1 mRNA levels. Paradoxically, targeting eIF4E, the
best-characterized effector of MNKs, increases ZEB1 mRNA expression through
repression of ZEB1-targeting miRNAs, miR-200c and miR-141. In contrast, targeting
the MNK effector hnRNPA1, which can function as a translational repressor,
increases ZEB1 protein without increasing ZEB1 mRNA levels. Importantly,
treatment with MNK inhibitors blocks growth of chemoresistant PDAC cells in
collagen and decreases the number of aldehyde dehydrogenase activity-positive
(Aldefluor+) cells. Significantly, MNK inhibitors increase E-cadherin mRNA levels
and decrease vimentin mRNA levels in human PDAC organoids without affecting ZEB1 
mRNA levels. Importantly, MNK inhibitors also decrease growth of human PDAC
organoids.IMPLICATIONS: These results demonstrate differential regulation of ZEB1
and EMT by MNKs and eIF4E, and identify MNKs as potential targets in pancreatic
cancer. Mol Cancer Res; 14(2); 216-27. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4755915 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26609108  [PubMed - in process]


91. Integr Biol (Camb). 2015 Dec;7(12):1518-25. doi: 10.1039/c5ib00157a. Epub 2015
Nov 13.

Development of an ex vivo breast cancer lung colonization model utilizing a
decellularized lung matrix.

Xiong G(1), Flynn TJ, Chen J, Trinkle C, Xu R.

Author information: 
(1)Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The metastatic spread of cancer cells to distant sites represents the major cause
of cancer-related deaths in breast cancer patients, and lungs are one of the most
common sites for metastatic colonization. Developing a physiologically relevant
tissue culture model to mimic lung colonization of breast cancer is crucial for
the investigation of the biology of cancer metastasis and evaluation of drug
treatment efficacy. Here, we describe an ex vivo lung colonization assay for
breast cancer using the native three-dimensional (3D) lung extracellular matrix. 
The native matrix was isolated from murine lungs using a decellularization
technique, and the preservation of extracellular matrix (ECM) composition,
integrity and mechanical properties was confirmed. We showed that metastatic
MDA-MB 231 and 4T1 cells invaded and colonized in the decellularized lung matrix,
whereas only a small mass of non-metastatic MCF7 cells survived under the same
condition. Furthermore, knockdown of ZEB1, an epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) inducer, significantly reduced invasion and colonization of MDA-MB 231
cells in the decellularized lung, suggesting an important role of EMT in breast
cancer metastasis. We conclude that the decellularized lung retains the
biophysical and biochemical properties of the lung ECM and provides a powerful
tool to investigate the lung colonization of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4673658 [Available on 2016-12-30]
PMID: 26563425  [PubMed - in process]


92. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2016;16(2):110-8.

Regulation of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition by E3 Ubiquitin Ligases and
Deubiquitinase in Cancer.

Inoue Y(1), Itoh Y, Sato K, Kawasaki F, Sumita C, Tanaka T, Morishita D, Hayashi 
H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Signaling, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan.
yainoue@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp. (2)Department of Cell Signaling, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku,
Nagoya 467-8603, Japan. hhayashi@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays an important role in the
development of tumor metastases by facilitating cell migration and invasion. One 
of the hallmarks of EMT is the diminished expression of E-cadherin and gain of
mesenchymal traits, which are regulated by core EMT-inducing transcriptional
factors (EMT-TFs), such as Snail/Slug, ZEB1/ZEB2, and Twist1. EMT-TFs are known
to be extremely labile proteins, and their protein levels are tightly controlled 
by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). Several E3 ubiquitin ligases have been 
shown to play crucial roles in the regulation of EMT, and genetic aberrations and
alterations in these ligases have been detected in human cancer. In this review, 
we focused on EMT-TFs, describing the UPS controlling their activities and
functions in cancer. A deeper understanding of the role of UPS in the regulation 
of EMT will provide valuable information for the development of effective
anti-metastatic drugs to modulate the malignant processes mediated by EMT.

PMID: 26560121  [PubMed - in process]


93. Nature. 2015 Nov 26;527(7579):525-30. doi: 10.1038/nature16064. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is dispensable for metastasis but induces
chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer.

Zheng X(1), Carstens JL(1), Kim J(1), Scheible M(1), Kaye J(1), Sugimoto H(1), Wu
CC(2), LeBleu VS(1), Kalluri R(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Metastasis Research Center, University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77054, USA. (2)Department of Genomic
Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77054,
USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2015 Nov 26;527(7579):452-3.

Diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is associated with a dismal 
prognosis despite current best therapies; therefore new treatment strategies are 
urgently required. Numerous studies have suggested that epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) contributes to early-stage dissemination of cancer cells and is 
pivotal for invasion and metastasis of PDAC. EMT is associated with phenotypic
conversion of epithelial cells into mesenchymal-like cells in cell culture
conditions, although such defined mesenchymal conversion (with spindle-shaped
morphology) of epithelial cells in vivo is rare, with quasi-mesenchymal
phenotypes occasionally observed in the tumour (partial EMT). Most studies
exploring the functional role of EMT in tumours have depended on
cell-culture-induced loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments involving 
EMT-inducing transcription factors such as Twist, Snail and Zeb1 (refs 2, 3,
7-10). Therefore, the functional contribution of EMT to invasion and metastasis
remains unclear, and genetically engineered mouse models to address a causal
connection are lacking. Here we functionally probe the role of EMT in PDAC by
generating mouse models of PDAC with deletion of Snail or Twist, two key
transcription factors responsible for EMT. EMT suppression in the primary tumour 
does not alter the emergence of invasive PDAC, systemic dissemination or
metastasis. Suppression of EMT leads to an increase in cancer cell proliferation 
with enhanced expression of nucleoside transporters in tumours, contributing to
enhanced sensitivity to gemcitabine treatment and increased overall survival of
mice. Collectively, our study suggests that Snail- or Twist-induced EMT is not
rate-limiting for invasion and metastasis, but highlights the importance of
combining EMT inhibition with chemotherapy for the treatment of pancreatic
cancer.

PMID: 26560028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biosci Trends. 2015 Oct;9(5):325-34. doi: 10.5582/bst.2015.01106.

Decrease of ZEB1 expression inhibits the B16F10 cancer stem-like properties.

Zhao F(1), He X, Wang Y, Shi F, Wu D, Pan M, Li M, Wu S, Wang X, Dou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Southeast
University.

Increasing evidence supports that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are responsible for
driving tumor initiation and maintenance. Zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1
(ZEB1) is a transcription factor for regulating tumor progression, and
contributes to maintenance of CSC-like properties. The goal of the present study 
is to investigate the effect of decreasing ZEB1 expression on the B16F10 CSC-like
properties. The recombinant shRNA targeting ZEB1 were transfected into melanoma
B16F10 cells, and shZEB1-CD133(+)CD44(+) CSCs were isolated from the stable
transfected cells using the magnetic-associated cell sorting method. The
shZEB1-CD133(+)CD44(+) CSC-like properties were systematically analyzed. The
results show the B16F10 shZEB1-CD133(+)CD44(+) CSCs significantly decreased the
ability of clonogenicity, cellular proliferation, migration, and invasion.
Importantly, tumorigenicity and tumor lung metastasis was significantly inhibited
in B16F10 shZEB1-CD133(+)CD44(+) CSCs compared with B16F10
scramble-CD133(+)CD44(+) CSCs. The decrease of ZEB1 expression markedly resulted 
in down-regulation of vimentin and N-cadherin expression as well as up-regulation
of E-cadherin expression in tumor tissues from the mice injected with B16F10
shZEB1-CD44(+)CD133(+) CSCs. These findings contribute to understanding the
maintenance of B16F10 CD133(+)CD44(+) CSC-like properties that was closely
associated with ZEB1 expression. ZEB1 may serve as a new therapeutic target for
treatment of malignant melanoma.

PMID: 26559025  [PubMed - in process]


95. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 25;468(4):739-45. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.025. Epub 2015 Nov 7.

miR-590-3p suppresses cancer cell migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition in glioblastoma multiforme by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2.

Pang H(1), Zheng Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Xiu X(1), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150086, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086, China.
Electronic address: wangjianjiao1977@sina.com.

Invasion and migration of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a multistep process
and an important phenotype that causes this disease to invade surrounding tissues
in the brain. The purpose of this study was to determine the role of miR-590-3p
in regulation of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis of GBM
cells. Expression levels of miR-590-3p in 15 GBM specimens with adjacent tissues 
and five GBM cell lines were assessed by quantitative RT-PCR. We found that
miR-590-3p was down-regulated in detected GBM tissue samples and all of the GBM
cell lines. In addition, Ectopic expression of miR-590-3p suppressed and
miR-590-3p-in promoted EMT, migration, and invasion in U87MG and A172 cells.
Bioinformatics coupled with luciferase and Western blot assays also revealed that
miR-590-3p inhibited expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2, which are master regulators of 
tumor metastasis. Our study first indicates that miR-590-3p functions as a
suppressor of GBM EMT and metastasis by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2, and it may be a 
therapeutic target for metastatic GBM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26556542  [PubMed - in process]


96. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Dec;99(3):707-16. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.11.014. Epub
2015 Nov 10.

Diminution of miR-340-5p levels is responsible for increased expression of ABCB5 
in melanoma cells under oxygen-deprived conditions.

Wozniak M(1), Sztiller-Sikorska M(2), Czyz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of Cancer, Medical University of Lodz, 6/8
Mazowiecka Street, 92-215 Lodz, Poland. Electronic address:
michal.wozniak@umed.lodz.pl. (2)Department of Molecular Biology of Cancer,
Medical University of Lodz, 6/8 Mazowiecka Street, 92-215 Lodz, Poland.

Melanoma is usually highly refractory to chemotherapy. This resistance to
treatment is mainly due to high heterogeneity and plasticity of melanoma cells
strictly connected to changes in tumor microenvironment. Hypoxia can drastically 
alter cancer biology. Solid tumor cells under hypoxia gain stem-like features,
they are more invasive and drug-resistant than their normoxic counterparts. These
effects could be mediated by changes in miRNA expression under hypoxia. MiRNAs
are small non-coding RNA molecules that can negatively control gene expression.
In the present study using microarray technology we evaluated the expression of
miRNAs in melanoma cells derived from nodular melanoma and grown under normoxic
and hypoxic conditions. Using R environment for statistical analysis we found
that 70 miRNAs were differentially-expressed, and 16 of them were significantly
down-regulated in melanoma cells grown in hypoxic conditions compared to cells
grown in normoxia. We intended to find transcripts whose expression is increased 
due to down-regulation of selected miRNAs. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that 
increased levels of HIF-2a, ABCB5, OCT4, SOX2 and ZEB1 in different melanoma
populations under hypoxia could be a result of significant down-regulation of
miR-340-5p. Inhibition of miR-340-5p confirmed that this miRNA negatively
influences the expression of ABCB5. This is the first study showing the
relationship between miR-340-5p and expression of ABCB5, a transmembrane
transporter involved in drug resistance considered as a marker of melanoma
stem-like cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26554847  [PubMed - in process]


97. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Nov 10;11(11):e1004569. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004569.
eCollection 2015.

An Ovol2-Zeb1 Mutual Inhibitory Circuit Governs Bidirectional and Multi-step
Transition between Epithelial and Mesenchymal States.

Hong T(1,)(2), Watanabe K(2,)(3), Ta CH(1,)(2), Villarreal-Ponce A(2,)(3), Nie
Q(1,)(2), Dai X(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
California, United States of America. (2)Center for Complex Biological Systems,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.

Reversible epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is central to tissue
development, epithelial stemness, and cancer metastasis. While many regulatory
elements have been identified to induce EMT, the complex process underlying such 
cellular plasticity remains poorly understood. Utilizing a systems biology
approach integrating modeling and experiments, we found multiple intermediate
states contributing to EMT and that the robustness of the transitions is
modulated by transcriptional factor Ovol2. In particular, we obtained evidence
for a mutual inhibition relationship between Ovol2 and EMT inducer Zeb1, and
observed that adding this regulation generates a novel four-state system
consisting of two distinct intermediate phenotypes that differ in differentiation
propensities and are favored in different environmental conditions. We identified
epithelial cells that naturally exist in an intermediate state with bidirectional
differentiation potential, and found the balance between EMT-promoting and
-inhibiting factors to be critical in achieving and selecting between
intermediate states. Our analysis suggests a new design principle in controlling 
cellular plasticity through multiple intermediate cell fates and underscores the 
critical involvement of Ovol2 and its associated molecular regulations.

PMCID: PMC4640575
PMID: 26554584  [PubMed - in process]


98. Nat Genet. 2015 Dec;47(12):1426-34. doi: 10.1038/ng.3444. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Genomic profiling of Sézary syndrome identifies alterations of key T cell
signaling and differentiation genes.

Wang L(1), Ni X(2), Covington KR(1), Yang BY(2), Shiu J(2), Zhang X(2), Xi L(1), 
Meng Q(1), Langridge T(2), Drummond J(1), Donehower LA(3), Doddapaneni H(1),
Muzny DM(1), Gibbs RA(1), Wheeler DA(1), Duvic M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Sézary syndrome is a rare leukemic form of cutaneous T cell lymphoma
characterized by generalized redness, scaling, itching and increased numbers of
circulating atypical T lymphocytes. It is rarely curable, with poor prognosis.
Here we present a multiplatform genomic analysis of 37 patients with Sézary
syndrome that implicates dysregulation of cell cycle checkpoint and T cell
signaling. Frequent somatic alterations were identified in TP53, CARD11, CCR4,
PLCG1, CDKN2A, ARID1A, RPS6KA1 and ZEB1. Activating CCR4 and CARD11 mutations
were detected in nearly one-third of patients. ZEB1, encoding a transcription
repressor essential for T cell differentiation, was deleted in over one-half of
patients. IL32 and IL2RG were overexpressed in nearly all cases. Our results
demonstrate profound disruption of key signaling pathways in Sézary syndrome and 
suggest potential targets for new therapies.

PMID: 26551670  [PubMed - in process]


99. APMIS. 2015 Dec;123(12):1040-7. doi: 10.1111/apm.12473.

Nuclear, cytoplasmic, and stromal expression of ZEB1 in squamous and small cell
carcinoma of the esophagus.

Goscinski MA(1), Xu R(2), Zhou F(3), Wang J(2), Yang H(4), Huang R(5), Li Y(5),
Larsen SG(1), Giercksky KE(1), Nesland JM(5), Suo Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (2)Department of Oncology, Anyang Tumor Hospital, Anyang,
Henan Province, China. (3)Department of Surgery, Anyang Tumor Hospital, Anyang,
Henan Province, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Anyang Tumor Hospital, Anyang,
Henan Province, China. (5)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital,
Oslo University Hospital, Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a transcriptional factor known to 
repress E-cadherin promoter and thus induce EMT. Expression of ZEB-1 has in
numerous cancers been associated with aggressive disease and poor clinical
outcome. Our aim was to investigate the expression of ZEB1 in esophageal
squamous- and small-cell carcinomas. Immunohistochemical staining was performed
on tissue sections obtained from 151 patients with esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) and 25 patients with primary small-cell carcinoma of the
esophagus (PSCCE). Semi-quantitative analysis, and thus statistical analysis, has
been accomplished on the samples. Immunohistochemistry revealed ZEB1 expression
in the cytoplasm (64.9% of cases), in nuclei (11.3% of cases) and in tumor stroma
(80.1% of cases) of ESCC. In PSCCE only nuclear staining (88.0% of cases) was
observed. Weak cytoplasmic expression of ZEB1 in ESCC was associated with longer 
survival. Immunohistochemical evaluation of ZEB1 cytoplasmic expression in ESCC
may have clinical prognostic value, but further studies are needed to fully
understand the function as well as potential clinical and therapeutic
implications of ZEB1 expression in cancers.

© 2015 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26547370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Jan;411(1-2):331-40. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2595-8. Epub 
2015 Nov 6.

Down-regulation of FBP1 by ZEB1-mediated repression confers to growth and
invasion in lung cancer cells.

Zhang J(1), Wang J(1), Xing H(1), Li Q(2), Zhao Q(1), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Xiangyang Central Hospital, Hubei University of Arts
and Science, Jinzhou Road 136#, Xiangyang, 441021, Hubei, People's Republic of
China. (2)Department of Oncology, Xiangyang Central Hospital, Hubei University of
Arts and Science, Jinzhou Road 136#, Xiangyang, 441021, Hubei, People's Republic 
of China. qingfenglixy@126.com.

Lung cancer is the most common type of malignant tumor, but the molecular
mechanisms for lung cancer progression remains to be elusive. Here, we
demonstrated that FBP1 (Fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase) was frequently
down-regulated in lung cancer tissues and cells, and FBP1 down-regulation was
associated with poor prognosis in lung cancer patients. Restored FBP1 expression 
inhibited glucose uptake and lactate production, but induced oxygen consumption. 
Restored FBP1 expression also inhibited lung cancer cells proliferation and
invasion under hypoxia in vitro, and inhibited lung cancer growth in vivo.
Moreover, we confirmed DNA methylation in the promoter contributed to the
decrease of FBP1 expression in lung cancer cells. We identified Zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) bond to FBP1 promoter to enhance DNA methylation 
in lung cancer cells. Our findings indicate that the down-regulation of FBP1 is a
critical oncogenic event in lung cancer progression.

PMID: 26546081  [PubMed - in process]


101. Cancer Sci. 2016 Jan;107(1):18-27. doi: 10.1111/cas.12844. Epub 2015 Dec 11.

Long non-coding RNA urothelial cancer-associated 1 promotes bladder cancer cell
migration and invasion by way of the hsa-miR-145-ZEB1/2-FSCN1 pathway.

Xue M(1), Pang H(2), Li X(1), Li H(1), Pan J(1), Chen W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. (2)Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

Numerous studies suggest that several long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play
critical roles in bladder cancer development and progression. Long non-coding RNA
urothelial cancer-associated 1 (lncRNA-UCA1) is highly expressed in bladder
cancer tissues and cells, and it has been shown to play an important role in
regulating aggressive phenotypes of bladder cancer cells. However, little is
known about the molecular mechanism of lncRNA-UCA1-mediated bladder cancer cell
migration and invasion. Here, we show that overexpression of lncRNA-UCA1 could
induce EMT and increase the migratory and invasive abilities of bladder cancer
cells. Mechanistically, lncRNA-UCA1 induced EMT of bladder cancer cells by
upregulating the expression levels of zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 and 2 
(ZEB1 and ZEB2), and regulated bladder cancer cell migration and invasion by
tumor suppressive hsa-miR-145 and its target gene the actin-binding protein
fascin homologue 1 (FSCN1). Furthermore, we also observed a positive correlation 
between lncRNA-UCA1 and ZEB1/2 expression, and a negative correlation between
lncRNA-UCA1 and hsa-miR-145 expression in bladder cancer specimens. Importantly, 
we found that lncRNA-UCA1 repressed hsa-miR-145 expression to upregulate ZEB1/2, 
whereas the suppression of hsa-miR-145 could upregulate lncRNA-UCA1 expression in
bladder cancer cells. Moreover, the binding site for hsa-miR-145 within exons 2
and 3 of lncRNA-UCA1 contributed to the reciprocal negative regulation of
lncRNA-UCA1 and hsa-miR-145. Taken together, our results identified that
lncRNA-UCA1 enhances bladder cancer cell migration and invasion in part through
the hsa-miR-145/ZEB1/2/FSCN1 pathway. Therefore, lncRNA-UCA1 might act as a
promising therapeutic target for the invasion and metastasis of bladder cancer.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4724815
PMID: 26544536  [PubMed - in process]


102. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 5;7(1):351-61. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5968.

An hTERT/ZEB1 complex directly regulates E-cadherin to promote
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in colorectal cancer.

Qin Y(1), Tang B(1), Hu CJ(1), Xiao YF(1), Xie R(1), Yong X(1), Wu YY(1), Dong
H(1), Yang SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, P.R. China.

In human cancer, high telomerase expression is correlated with tumor
aggressiveness and metastatic potential. Telomerase activation occurs through
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) induction, which contributes to
malignant transformation by stabilizing telomeres. Previous studies have shown
that hTERT can promote tumor invasion and metastasis of gastric cancer, liver
cancer and esophageal cancer. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a
requirement for tumor invasion and metastasis, plays a key role in cancer
progression. Although hTERT promotes EMT through Wnt signaling in several
cancers, it is unknown if other signaling pathways are involved. In the present
study, we found that hTERT and ZEB1 form a complex, which directly binds to the
E-cadherin promoter, and then inhibits E-cadherin expression and promots EMT in
colorectal cancer cells. hTERT overexpression in HCT116 and SW480 cells could
induce E-cadherin down-regulation. However, E-cadherin expression was recovered
when ZEB1 function was impaired even during hTERT overexpression. Taken together,
our findings suggest that hTERT can promote cancer metastasis by stimulating EMT 
through the ZEB1 pathway and therefore inhibiting them may prevent cancer
progression.

PMID: 26540342  [PubMed - in process]


103. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 8;6(39):42258-75. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5546.

A Polycomb-mir200 loop regulates clinical outcome in bladder cancer.

Martínez-Fernández M(1,)(2), Dueñas M(1,)(2), Feber A(3), Segovia C(1,)(2),
García-Escudero R(1,)(2), Rubio C(1,)(2), López-Calderón FF(1,)(2), Díaz-García
C(1), Villacampa F(2,)(4), Duarte J(2,)(4), Gómez-Rodriguez MJ(2,)(4), Castellano
D(2,)(4), Rodriguez-Peralto JL(5), de la Rosa F(2,)(4), Beck S(3), Paramio
JM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (ed70A), 28040 Madrid, Spain. (2)Universitary 
Hospital 12 de Octubre, Research Institute 12 de Octubre i+12, 28041 Madrid,
Spain. (3)Medical Genomics, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London,
London WC1E 6BT, UK. (4)Uro-oncology Section, Universitary Hospital 12 de
Octubre, 28041 Madrid, Spain. (5)Anatomic Pathology Service, Universitary
Hospital 12 de Octubre, Research Institute 12 de Octubre i+12, 28041 Madrid,
Spain.

Bladder cancer (BC) is a highly prevalent disease, ranking fifth in the most
common cancers worldwide. Various miRNAs have recently emerged as potential
prognostic biomarkers in cancer. The miR-200 family, which repressed the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is repressed in multiple advanced
cancers. However, its expression and function in BC is still poorly understood.
Here we show that miR-200 family displays increased expression, probably due to
the activation of specific oncogenic signaling pathways, and reduced promoter
methylation, in BC compared to normal bladder samples. Furthermore, we show that 
the expression of these miRNAs is decreased in high grade and stage tumors, and
the down-regulation is associated with patient's poor clinical outcome. Our data 
indicate that the miR-200 family plays distinct roles in Non-Muscle (NMIBC) and
Muscle-Invasive BC (MIBC). In MIBC, miR-200 expression post transcriptionally
regulates EMT-promoting transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2, whereas suppresses
BMI1 expression in NMIBC. Interestingly, we show that increased EZH2 and/or BMI1 
expression repress the expression of miR-200 family members. Collectively, these 
findings support a model of BC progression through a coordinated action between
the Polycomb Repression Complex (PRC) members repressing the miR-200 expression, 
which ultimately favors invasive BC development. Since pharmacological inhibition
of EZH2 in BC cell lines lead to increased miR-200 expression, our findings may
support new therapeutic strategies for BC clinical management.

PMCID: PMC4747223
PMID: 26517683  [PubMed - in process]


104. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12;7(2):1227-41. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6237.

Fisetin, a dietary flavonoid, augments the anti-invasive and anti-metastatic
potential of sorafenib in melanoma.

Pal HC(1), Diamond AC(1), Strickland LR(1), Kappes JC(2), Katiyar SK(1,)(3),
Elmets CA(1,)(3), Athar M(1,)(2), Afaq F(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (3)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Melanoma is the most aggressive and deadly form of cutaneous neoplasm due to its 
propensity to metastasize. Oncogenic BRAF drives sustained activation of the
BRAF/MEK/ERK (MAPK) pathway and cooperates with PI3K/AKT/mTOR (PI3K) signaling to
induce epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), leading to cell invasion and
metastasis. Therefore, targeting these pathways is a promising
preventive/therapeutic strategy. We have shown that fisetin, a flavonoid, reduces
human melanoma cell invasion by inhibiting EMT. In addition, fisetin inhibited
melanoma cell proliferation and tumor growth by downregulating the PI3K pathway. 
In this investigation, we aimed to determine whether fisetin can potentiate the
anti-invasive and anti-metastatic effects of sorafenib in BRAF-mutated melanoma. 
We found that combination treatment (fisetin + sorafenib) more effectively
reduced the migration and invasion of BRAF-mutated melanoma cells both in vitro
and in raft cultures compared to individual agents. Combination treatment also
effectively inhibited EMT as observed by a decrease in N-cadherin, vimentin and
fibronectin and an increase in E-cadherin both in vitro and in xenograft tumors. 
Furthermore, combination therapy effectively inhibited Snail1, Twist1, Slug and
ZEB1 protein expression compared to monotherapy. The expression of MMP-2 and
MMP-9 in xenograft tumors was further reduced in combination treatment compared
to individual agents. Bioluminescent imaging of athymic mice, intravenously
injected with stably transfected CMV-luciferase-ires-puromycin.T2A.EGFP-tagged
A375 melanoma cells, demonstrated fewer lung metastases following combination
treatment versus monotherapy. Our findings demonstrate that fisetin potentiates
the anti-invasive and anti-metastatic effects of sorafenib. Our data suggest that
fisetin may be a worthy adjuvant chemotherapy for the management of melanoma.

PMID: 26517521  [PubMed - in process]


105. Pathol Int. 2015 Dec;65(12):635-43. doi: 10.1111/pin.12354. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Wide expression of ZEB1 in sarcomatous component of spindle cell carcinoma of the
esophagus.

Nakazawa T(1), Nobusawa S(1), Ikota H(1), Kuwano H(2), Takeyoshi I(3), Yokoo
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan. (2)Department of General Surgical Science, Gunma University
Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan. (3)Department of Thoracic and
Visceral Organ Surgery, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi,
Japan.

The pathogenesis of sarcomatous component in spindle cell carcinoma (SpCC) of the
esophagus is unclear. To investigate the involvement of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in sarcomatous differentiation, we performed
immunohistochemistry for Slug, Twist, ZEB1, and ZEB2, transcription factors
associated with EMT and E-cadherin, in 14 cases of SpCC of the esophagus. In
order to verify the neoplastic nature of sarcomatous components, TP53 mutation
status and protein expression were examined in each case. Nuclear ZEB1 expression
was extensive in the sarcomatous component, greater than invasive front of
carcinoma components (P < 0.0001). Membranous E-cadherin expression was mostly
lost in sarcomatous cells in all cases (P < 0.0001). The p53 expression pattern
was almost concordant between the two areas in all cases. TP53 mutation analysis 
revealed that seven cases harbored identical mutations in both components. One
case had mutations only in the sarcomatous component. It is noteworthy that none 
of them harbored mutation in exon 5, unlike conventional esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma. These findings show that ZEB1 are widely expressed in the sarcomatous 
area of SpCC of the esophagus, suggesting the involvement of EMT. The avoidance
of exon 5 in terms of TP53 mutation may also be a feature of the tumor.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26515382  [PubMed - in process]


106. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 29;34:133. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0245-3.

HOXD9 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer metastasis by ZEB1
regulation in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lv X(1), Li L(2), Lv L(3), Qu X(4), Jin S(5), Li K(6), Deng X(7), Cheng L(8), He 
H(9), Dong L(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, 116001, China. ttsdoc@126.com. (2)Department of the 4th
Internal Medical, Liaoning Cancer Hospital & Institute, Shenyang, 110042, China. 
lifangyidoc@163.com. (3)Department of Pathology, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116027, China. zyltg2013@163.com.
(4)Department of Second Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian
Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China. snldoc@163.com. (5)Department of
Laparoscopic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, 116001, China. jinshidoc@163.com. (6)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery, 
First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China.
zhiqhutg@126.com. (7)Department of Radiation Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China. guangyingqitg@163.com.
(8)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian
Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China. chengleidoc@126.com. (9)Department of 
Laparoscopic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, 116001, China. hehuidoc@yeah.net. (10)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery,
First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China.
dlleidong@126.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common malignant tumor that severely
threatens human health. The poor prognosis of HCC is mainly attributed to
intrahepatic and extrahepatic metastases. HOXD9 proteins belong to a superfamily 
that regulates the development and control of many cellular processes, including 
proliferation, apoptosis, cell shape, and cell migration. HOXD9 can also function
as an oncogene in several cancer cells. However, its biological function in human
HCC requires further investigation. In this study, HOXD9 exhibited high
expression in invasive HCC cells. HOXD9 overexpression can significantly enhance 
HCC cell migration, invasion, and metastasis, whereas silencing HOXD9 inhibits
these processes. HOXD9 also promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
of HCC cells. Microarray analysis suggests that ZEB1 can function as a downstream
factor of HOXD9. HOXD9 can interact with the promoter region of ZEB1 and promotes
ZEB1 expression. ZEB1 knockdown inhibits HOXD9-induced migration and invasion, as
well as EMT in HCC cells. This study helps elucidates the oncogenic functions of 
HOXD9 in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4625617
PMID: 26514226  [PubMed - in process]


107. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2015 Dec;47(12):997-1004. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmv107. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

KDM4B promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition through up-regulation of ZEB1 in
pancreatic cancer.

Li S(1), Wu L(2), Wang Q(1), Li Y(3), Wang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intervetional Radiology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Tengzhou Central People's
Hospital, Tengzhou 277500, China. (3)Cancer Research Institute, Shanghai Cancer
Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China liyingyi@fudan.edu.cn
wangxl_shmu@163.com. (4)Department of Intervetional Radiology, Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China liyingyi@fudan.edu.cn
wangxl_shmu@163.com.

Lysine (K)-specific demethylase 4B (KDM4B) is a histone H3K9 demethylase and is
reported to activate gene transcription through regulation of chromatin
structures. Previous research has revealed that KDM4B plays special regulatory
roles in colorectal, prostate and gastric cancers. However, its physiological
role in pancreatic cancer remains largely unknown. In the present study, it is
demonstrated KDM4B plays a crucial in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in 
pancreatic cancer. siRNA mediated silencing of KDM4B inhibits cell migration,
invasion and EMT. Moreover, KDM4B was demonstrated to epigenetically regulate the
expression of ZEB1 in the TGF-ß-induced EMT process. In tumor tissues of
pancreatic cancer patient, the protein level of KDM4B was positively correlated
with ZEB1. In conclusion, our results suggested that KDM4B is a key mediator in
EMT process, and may serve as an important prognostic marker and therapeutic
target for the metastatic progression of human pancreatic cancer.

© The Author 2015. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26511091  [PubMed - in process]


108. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Oct 28. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.232. [Epub ahead of print]

Heterozygous deletions at the ZEB1 locus verify haploinsufficiency as the
mechanism of disease for posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy type 3.

Liskova P(1,)(2), Evans CJ(3), Davidson AE(3), Zaliova M(4), Dudakova L(1),
Trkova M(5), Stranecky V(1), Carnt N(3,)(6), Plagnol V(7), Vincent AL(8,)(9),
Tuft SJ(6), Hardcastle AJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University in Prague and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in 
Prague and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. (3)UCL Institute 
of Ophthalmology, London, UK. (4)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Second Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Charles University in
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (5)Gennet, Centre for Fetal Medicine and
Reproductive Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic. (6)Moorfields Eye Hospital,
London, UK. (7)UCL Genetics Institute, London, UK. (8)Department of
Ophthalmology, New Zealand National Eye Centre, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. (9)Eye Department,
Greenlane Clinical Centre, Auckland District Health Board, Auckland, New Zealand.

A substantial proportion of patients with posterior polymorphous corneal
dystrophy (PPCD) lack a molecular diagnosis. We evaluated 14 unrelated probands
who had a clinical diagnosis of PPCD who were previously determined to be
negative for mutations in ZEB1 by direct sequencing. A combination of techniques 
was used including whole-exome sequencing (WES), single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) array copy number variation (CNV) analysis, quantitative real-time PCR, and
long-range PCR. Segregation of potentially pathogenic changes with disease was
confirmed, where possible, in family members. A putative run of homozygosity on
chromosome 10 was identified by WES in a three-generation PPCD family, suggestive
of a heterozygous deletion. SNP array genotyping followed by long-range PCR and
direct sequencing to define the breakpoints confirmed the presence of a large
deletion that encompassed multiple genes, including ZEB1. Identification of a
heterozygous deletion spanning ZEB1 prompted us to further investigate potential 
CNVs at this locus in the remaining probands, leading to detection of two
additional heterozygous ZEB1 gene deletions. This study demonstrates that ZEB1
mutations account for a larger proportion of PPCD than previously estimated, and 
supports the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency of ZEB1 is the underlying
molecular mechanism of disease for PPCD3.European Journal of Human Genetics
advance online publication, 28 October 2015; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.232.

PMID: 26508574  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


109. J Exp Med. 2015 Nov 16;212(12):2027-39. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150194. Epub 2015 Oct 
26.

Transcriptional repressor ZEB2 promotes terminal differentiation of CD8+ effector
and memory T cell populations during infection.

Omilusik KD(1), Best JA(1), Yu B(1), Goossens S(2), Weidemann A(3), Nguyen JV(1),
Seuntjens E(4), Stryjewska A(4), Zweier C(5), Roychoudhuri R(6), Gattinoni L(7), 
Bird LM(8), Higashi Y(9), Kondoh H(10), Huylebroeck D(11), Haigh J(12), Goldrath 
AW(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093. (2)Mammalian Functional Genetics Laboratory, Division of Blood
Cancers, Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne,
Victoria 3004, Australia VIB Inflammation Research Center, Ghent University, 9052
Ghent, Belgium Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052
Ghent, Belgium. (3)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension,
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
91054 Erlangen, Germany. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Biology (Celgen), Department 
of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (5)Institute of
Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. (6)Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer 
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892. (7)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Rady Children's Hospital San Diego,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093. (9)Department of
Perinatology, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human Service Center,
Kasugai, Aichi 480-0392, Japan. (10)Faculty of Life Sciences, Kyoto Sangyo
University, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan. (11)Laboratory of Molecular Biology
(Celgen), Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, 3015 CN Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(12)Mammalian Functional Genetics Laboratory, Division of Blood Cancers,
Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria
3004, Australia. (13)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 agoldrath@ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 Nov 16;212(12):1990.

ZEB2 is a multi-zinc-finger transcription factor known to play a significant role
in early neurogenesis and in epithelial-mesenchymal transition-dependent tumor
metastasis. Although the function of ZEB2 in T lymphocytes is unknown, activity
of the closely related family member ZEB1 has been implicated in lymphocyte
development. Here, we find that ZEB2 expression is up-regulated by activated T
cells, specifically in the KLRG1(hi) effector CD8(+) T cell subset. Loss of ZEB2 
expression results in a significant loss of antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells after
primary and secondary infection with a severe impairment in the generation of the
KLRG1(hi) effector memory cell population. We show that ZEB2, which can bind DNA 
at tandem, consensus E-box sites, regulates gene expression of several E-protein 
targets and may directly repress Il7r and Il2 in CD8(+) T cells responding to
infection. Furthermore, we find that T-bet binds to highly conserved T-box sites 
in the Zeb2 gene and that T-bet and ZEB2 regulate similar gene expression
programs in effector T cells, suggesting that T-bet acts upstream and through
regulation of ZEB2. Collectively, we place ZEB2 in a larger transcriptional
network that is responsible for the balance between terminal differentiation and 
formation of memory CD8(+) T cells.

© 2015 Omilusik et al.

PMCID: PMC4647262 [Available on 2016-05-16]
PMID: 26503445  [PubMed - in process]


110. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Dec 10;339(2):360-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.10.018. Epub
2015 Oct 20.

Aberrant miR-21 and miR-200b expression and its pro-fibrotic potential in
hypertrophic scars.

Zhou R(1), Zhang Q(2), Zhang Y(3), Fu S(1), Wang C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai 9th People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, 
Shanghai 200011, China. (2)Department of Burn and Plastic Surgery, People's
Hospital of Dancheng County, 42 Ren Min Road, Zhoukou City, Henan Province
477150, China. (3)Institute of Arthritis Research, Shanghai Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences and Guanghua Integrative Medicine Hospital, China. (4)Department
of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai 9th People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, Shanghai 200011,
China. Electronic address: wangchen2369@163.com.

The post-traumatic hypertrophic scar (HS) is a fibrotic disease with excessive
extracellular matrix (ECM) production by fibroblasts in response to tissue
injury. Although dysregulation of miRNAs is known to be involved in a variety of 
pathophysiologic processes, the role of miRNA in hypertrophic scar formation is
unclear. Abnormal expression of miRNA in fibrosis has been investigated in
several studies. The transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1) promotes fibroblasts 
proliferation, the synthesis of collagen and other extracellular matrix, and
ultimately leads to the formation of the HS by inducing excessive deposition of
ECM. We identified two miRNAs whose expression was correlated with fibrotic
diseases: miR-21 and miR-200b. This study further confirmed that after
stimulation with TGF-ß1, the expression of miR-21 was increased, whereas the mRNA
level of SMAD7 was decreased in fibroblasts. TGF-ß1 reduced the expression of
miR-200b, while it augmented that of Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1(Zeb1). 
Our experiments demonstrated that the expression of miR-21 and miR-200b are
related to a disorder, and the TGF-ß/miR-21/Smad7 and TGF-ß/miR200b/Zeb1 pathways
might participate in the pathogenesis of HS. Thus, a novel, beyond the
traditional methods, approach for HS treatment via miRNA therapeutics could have 
been provided.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26500110  [PubMed - in process]


111. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):39661-75. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5350.

MiR-652 inhibits acidic microenvironment-induced epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of pancreatic cancer cells by targeting ZEB1.

Deng S(1,)(2), Li X(1), Niu Y(1), Zhu S(1), Jin Y(1), Deng S(1), Chen J(1), Liu
Y(1,)(2), He C(1), Yin T(1), Yang Z(1), Tao J(1), Xiong J(1), Wu H(1), Wang C(1),
Zhao G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pancreatic Disease Institute, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China. (2)Gastrointestinal
Surgery, Union Hospital West Campus, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430056, China.

Recent evidences suggest that the acidic microenvironment might facilitate
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) of tumor cells, while the effects of
acidity on EMT of pancreatic cancer (PC) remain undefined. The present study
demonstrated that acidity suppressed miR-652 expression, which further promoted
EMT process by absenting inhibition on the transcriptional factor ZEB1
expression. At first, we found that acidity remarkably enhanced invasion ability 
of PC cells accompanying with increased mesenchymal and decreased epithelial
markers. Meanwhile, miRNAs-microarray showed that miR-652, the potential
regulator of ZEB1, was distinctly decreased in acidity-treated PC cells.
Furthermore, restoration of miR-652 reversed acidity-induced EMT by inhibiting
ZEB1 expression, while miR-652 inhibitor induced EMT in normal PC cells through
promoting ZEB1 expression. Nevertheless, knockdown of ZEB1 significantly
suppressed acidity-induced EMT in PC cells, but ZEB1 overexpression rescued the
EMT which was inhibited by miR-652 overexpression. The in vivo results showed
that the tumor growth and liver metastasis were remarkably retarded by both
miR-652 overexpression and ZEB1 knockdown. The clinical samples further revealed 
that miR-652 was decreased in PC tissues and antagonistically correlated with
ZEB1 expression, associating with late tumor stage, lymphatic invasion and
metastasis. In conclusion, our study indicated a novel acidity/miR-652/ZEB1/EMT
axis in the tumorigenesis of PC.

PMCID: PMC4741853
PMID: 26498682  [PubMed - in process]


112. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Dec;36(6):1657-63. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2383. Epub 2015 Oct
21.

Evodiamine, a novel inhibitor of the Wnt pathway, inhibits the self-renewal of
gastric cancer stem cells.

Wen Z(1), Feng S(2), Wei L(3), Wang Z(4), Hong D(4), Wang Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310016, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Hangzhou Geriatric Hospital, The North Branch of Hangzhou First
People's Hospital Group, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310012, P.R. China. (3)Department of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China. (4)Department of
Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310014, P.R. China.

Gastric cancer stem cells (GCSCs) have an important role in metastasis and
recurrence of gastric cancer, and novel treatment strategies that target GCSCs
are urgently required. Although evodiamine (Evo), a derivative of the traditional
herbal medicine Evodia rutaecarpa, has been reported to have various biological
effects, its effect on GCSCs remains unknown. In order to determine the effect of
Evo on apoptosis of GCSCs, an MTS assay, flow cytometry and western blot analysis
were performed. The effect of Evo on self-renewal in GCSCs was measured by
alterations in the sphere formation ability, the expression of
induced-pluripotent stem cell factors, expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) factors and oxaliplatin resistance of gastric cancer cells
(GCCs). Evo inhibited proliferation, promoted the Bax/B-cell lymphoma 2 ratio and
altered active caspase-3 expression of GCSCs. In addition, Evo decreased the
sphere formation ability, the expression of Sox2, KLF4, Bmi-1 and Oct4, and
oxaliplatin resistance in GCCs. Evo decreased the expression of Slug, Twist, Zeb1
and vimentin, suggesting an inhibitory effect on EMT. Furthermore, the expression
of ß-catenin, c-Myc and cyclin D1 was decreased in Evo-treated spheroids from
GCCs. In conclusion, Evo inhibited the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway to inhibit
proliferation and stem cell properties of GCSCs and repressed the EMT. The
present findings highlight the prospect of Evo as a CSCs-targeted therapy in
gastric cancer.

PMID: 26497016  [PubMed - in process]


113. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Mar;31(3):595-603. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13206.

LncRNA-ATB mediated E-cadherin repression promotes the progression of colon
cancer and predicts poor prognosis.

Yue B(1), Qiu S(1), Zhao S(1), Liu C(1), Zhang D(1), Yu F(1), Peng Z(1), Yan
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated First 
People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNA-activated by TGF-ß (lncRNA-ATB) promotes the
invasion-metastasis cascade in hepatocellular carcinoma via downregulating
E-cadherin (E-cad) and inducing epithelial-to- mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
is clinically significant in human colon cancer. However, its molecular
mechanisms in colon cancer progression remain unclear. This study aimed to
elucidate the role of lncRNA-ATB and its clinical value in colon cancer.
METHODS: Expression levels of lncRNA-ATB in colon cancer tissues and colon cancer
cell lines were evaluated using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.
The clinicopathological significance and prognostic value of lncRNA-ATB were
investigated, and roles of lncRNA-ATB in regulating E-cad and other EMT-related
markers expression and colon cancer progression were evaluated in vitro.
Expression levels of lncRNA-ATB and E-cad in human plasma were evaluated.
RESULTS: Long non-coding RNA-activated by TGF-ß was upregulated in colon cancer
tissues compared with adjacent mucosa (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). LncRNA-ATB levels were also
higher in metastatic cancer tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Among the three highly invasive 
colon cancer cell lines, lncRNA-ATB levels were relatively higher with concurrent
low levels of E-cad compared with levels in the three low-invasive cell lines.
LncRNA-ATB expression correlated with pN stage (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and American Joint
Committee on Cancer stage (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Striking differences were observed in
overall survival and disease-free survival in cases with both high lncRNA-ATB
expression and low E-cad expression. Reduction of lncRNA-ATB increased expression
of epithelial markers E-cad, ZO-1, and decreased expression of mesenchymal
markers ZEB1 and N-cadherin (N-cad), and significantly influenced colon cancer
cell progression. Plasma lncRNA-ATB was upregulated in colon cancer patients one 
month after surgery (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Long non-coding RNA-activated by TGF-ß may act on colon
tumorigenesis by suppressing E-cad expression and promoting EMT process, and
lncRNA-ATB inhibition may provide a promising therapeutic option for suppressing 
colon cancer progression.

© 2015 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd.

PMID: 26487301  [PubMed - in process]


114. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Oct 19. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13204. [Epub ahead of
print]

Expression profile of microRNA-200 family in cholangiocarcinoma arising from
choledochal cyst.

Chu CH(1), Chou W(2,)(3), Wang F(1), Yeh CN(1), Chen TC(4), Yeh TS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at LinKou, Chang Gung
University Medical College, Taiwan. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital at LinKou, Chang Gung University Medical College, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at
LinKou, Chang Gung University Medical College, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The risk of cholangiocarcinoma arising from choledochal cyst 
(CC-CC) is imminent, if the latter not treated appropriately in time.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered a critical step for
various solid cancers, which is regulated by the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family.
The aim of this study was to assess the role of miR-200 family in the
pathogenesis of CC-CC.
METHODS: Sixteen patients with CC-CC were enrolled and 254 patients with
conventional cholangiocarcinoma (cCC) served as clinicopathologic controls.
Fifty-four cCC were selected to compare the miR-200 family expression and
immunohistochemical characteristics. Gain- and loss-of-function studies of
miR-200 family were conducted using the cholangiocarcinoma cell lines.
RESULTS: CC-CC were younger (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), more female- predominated (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), and
rarely associated with lithiasis (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) compared with those of cCC. miR-200
family was down-regulated in CC-CC, while miR-200 family was paradoxically
up-regulated in cCC (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). CC-CC exhibited overt overexpression of
mesenchymal markers including ZEB1, Twist, Snail, and vimentin as well an
aberrant E-cadherin expression in comparison with cCC. In vitro migration assay
showed that cholangiocarcinoma cells bearing lower miR-200<U+2009>s levels exhibited
stronger migration ability. Invasive ability of cholangiocarcinoma cells was
increased after miR-200<U+2009>s knockdown, accompanied by up-regulation of mesenchymal 
markers.
CONCLUSIONS: CC-CC was characterized by distinct demographics, precipitating
factors, and down-regulation of miR-200 family, compared with those of cCC. The
pathogenesis of CC-CC might partly link to the silencing of miR-200 family,
acting via ZEB1-directed EMT activation.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26479153  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


115. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 15. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-429 regulates gastric cancer cell invasiveness through ZEB proteins.

Liu W(1), An J(2), Li K(1), Hou H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Bethune International Peace Hospital, 398
Zhongshan West Road, Shijiazhuang, 050082, China. (2)Department of Pathology, The
Bethune International Peace Hospital, Shijiazhuang, 050082, China. (3)Department 
of General Surgery, The Bethune International Peace Hospital, 398 Zhongshan West 
Road, Shijiazhuang, 050082, China. hou64huichi@163.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an essential role in the tumorigenesis of gastric
carcinoma (GC). MiR-429 has been recently reported to inhibit GC growth; however,
whether miR-429 may also regulate the invasion of GC cells is unknown. Here, we
showed that miR-429 levels were significantly decreased and ZEB1 and ZEB2 levels 
were significantly increased in GC specimens, compared to the paired adjacent
non-tumor gastric tissue. Moreover, the levels of miR-429 and ZEB1 or ZEB2
inversely correlated in GC specimens. Bioinformatics analyses showed that miR-429
targeted the 3'-untranslated region of both ZEB1 and ZEB2 mRNA to inhibit their
translation, which was confirmed by luciferase reporter assay. Overexpression of 
miR-429 inhibited ZEB1/2-mediated cell invasiveness, while depletion of miR-429
augmented it. Together, our data suggest that miR-429 suppression in GC promotes 
ZEB1/2-mediated cancer cell invasion.

PMID: 26472725  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


116. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37200-15. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5808.

Plasma DCLK1 is a marker of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): Targeting DCLK1
prevents HCC tumor xenograft growth via a microRNA-dependent mechanism.

Sureban SM(1,)(2,)(3), Madhoun MF(1,)(2), May R(1,)(2), Qu D(1,)(2,)(3), Ali
N(1,)(2,)(3), Fazili J(1,)(2), Weygant N(1), Chandrakesan P(1,)(3), Ding K(4),
Lightfoot SA(5), Houchen CW(1,)(2,)(3,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (3)The Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (4)Department of Biostatistics & Epidemiology, The 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (6)COARE Biotechnology Inc., Oklahoma City, OK
73104, USA.

Tumor stem cell marker Doublecortin-like kinase1 (DCLK1) is upregulated in
several solid tumors. The role of DCLK1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
unclear. We immunostained tissues from human livers with HCC, cirrhosis controls 
(CC), and non-cirrhosis controls (NCC) for DCLK1. Western blot and ELISA analyses
for DCLK1 were performed with stored plasma samples. We observed increased
immunoreactive DCLK1 in epithelia and stroma in HCC and CCs compared with NCCs,
and observed a marked increase in plasma DCLK1 from patients with HCC compared
with CC and NCC. Analysis of the Cancer Genome Atlas' HCC dataset revealed that
DCLK1 is overexpressed in HCC tumors relative to adjacent normal tissues. High
DCLK1-expressing cells had more epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Various 
tumor suppressor miRNAs were also downregulated in HCC tumors. We evaluated the
effects of DCLK1 knockdown on Huh7.5-derived tumor xenograft growth. This was
associated with growth arrest and a marked downregulation of cMYC, and EMT
transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL, and SLUG via let-7a and miR-200
miRNA-dependent mechanisms. Furthermore, upregulation of miR-143/145, a
corresponding decrease in pluripotency factors OCT4, NANOG, KLF4, and LIN28, and 
a reduction of let-7a, miR-143/145, and miR-200-specific luciferase activity was 
observed. These findings suggest that the detection of elevated plasma DCLK1 may 
provide a cost-effective, less invasive tool for confirmation of clinical signs
of cirrhosis, and a potential companion diagnostic marker for patients with
cirrhosis and HCC. Our results support evaluating DCLK1 as a biomarker for
detection and as a therapeutic target for eradicating HCC.

PMCID: PMC4741924
PMID: 26468984  [PubMed - in process]


117. Int J Oncol. 2015 Dec;47(6):2141-52. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3187. Epub 2015 Sep
28.

MicroRNA-33b inhibits lung adenocarcinoma cell growth, invasion, and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by suppressing Wnt/ß-catenin/ZEB1 signaling.

Qu J(1), Li M(1), An J(1), Zhao B(1), Zhong W(1), Gu Q(1), Cao L(1), Yang H(1),
Hu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, The Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.

Altered expression of microRNA (miRNA) is associated with lung carcinogenesis and
metastasis. Our previous study of lung cancer miRNAs using the gene chip assay
demonstrated altered miR-33b expression in lung adenocarcinoma. The present study
further investigated miR-33b expression, function, and gene regulation in lung
cancer cells in vitro and in nude mouse xenografts. Our data showed that the
level of miR-33b expression was dramatically decreased in lung adenocarcinoma
cell lines and tissues and that the reduced miR-33b expression was associated
with tumor lymph node metastasis. Furthermore, restoration of miR-33b expression 
inhibited lung adenocarcinoma cell proliferation, migration, and invasion and
tumor cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in vitro. Luciferase assay
revealed that miR-33b bound to ZEB1 3'-UTR region and inhibited ZEB1 expression, 
while expression of ZEB1 mRNA and miR-33b was inversely associated with lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines and tissues. Subsequently, we found that miR-33b
suppressed the activity of WNT/ß-catenin signaling in lung adenocarcinoma cells
and in turn suppressed tumor cell growth and EMT in vitro and in vivo nude mouse 
xenografts. In conclusion, the present study provided novel insight into the
molecular mechanism of lung adenocarcinoma progression. MicroRNA-33b should be
further investigated as a potential therapeutic target in human lung
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 26459797  [PubMed - in process]


118. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2016 Mar;19(1):40-5. doi: 10.1038/pcan.2015.46.
Epub 2015 Oct 13.

Evaluation of an epithelial plasticity biomarker panel in men with localized
prostate cancer.

Armstrong AJ(1,)(2), Healy P(2,)(3), Halabi S(2,)(3), Vollmer R(4), Lark A(4),
Kemeny G(2,)(5), Ware K(5), Freedland SJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Division of Medical Oncology, Durham, NC, USA. (2)Duke 
Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. (3)Department 
of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Durham, NC, USA. (4)Department of Pathology,
Duke University and the Durham VA Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. (5)Department 
of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Durham, NC, USA. (6)Department of
Surgery/Division of Urology, Duke University and the Durham VA Medical Center,
now at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Given the potential importance of epithelial plasticity (EP) to
cancer metastasis, we sought to investigate biomarkers related to EP in men with 
localized prostate cancer (PC) for the association with time to PSA recurrence
and other clinical outcomes after surgery.
METHODS: Men with localized PC treated with radical prostatectomy at the Durham
VA Medical Center and whose prostatectomy tissues were included in a tissue
microarray (TMA) linked to long-term outcomes. We performed immunohistochemical
studies using validated antibodies against E-cadherin and Ki-67 and mesenchymal
biomarkers including N-cadherin, vimentin, SNAIL, ZEB1 and TWIST. Association
studies were conducted for each biomarker with baseline clinical/pathologic
characteristics an risk of PSA recurrence over time.
RESULTS: Two hundred and five men contributed TMA tissue and had long-term
follow-up (median 11 years). Forty-three percent had PSA recurrence; three died
of PC. The majority had high E-cadherin expression (86%); 14% had low/absent
E-cadherin expression. N-cadherin was rarely expressed (<4%) and we were unable
to identify an E-to-N-cadherin switch as independently prognostic. No
associations with clinical risk group, PSA recurrence or Gleason sum were noted
for SNAIL, ZEB1, vimentin or TWIST, despite heterogeneous expression between
patients. We observed an association of higher Ki-67 expression with Gleason sum 
(P=0.043), National Comprehensive Cancer Network risk (P=0.013) and PSA
recurrence (hazard ratio 1.07, P=0.016).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of EP biomarkers in this cohort of men with a low
risk of PC-specific mortality was not associated with aggressive features or PSA 
relapse after surgery.

PMCID: PMC4747832 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26458958  [PubMed - in process]


119. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 12. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.366. [Epub ahead of print]

SPROUTY-2 represses the epithelial phenotype of colon carcinoma cells via
upregulation of ZEB1 mediated by ETS1 and miR-200/miR-150.

Barbáchano A(1), Fernández-Barral A(1), Pereira F(1), Segura MF(2), Ordóñez-Morán
P(1), Carrillo-de Santa Pau E(3), González-Sancho JM(1), Hanniford D(2), Martínez
N(4), Costales-Carrera A(1), Real FX(3,)(5), Pálmer HG(6), Rojas JM(4), Hernando 
E(2), Muñoz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto
Sols', Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of Pathology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, USA. (3)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain. (4)Unidad de Biología Celular, Unidad
Funcional de Investigación en Enfermedades Crónicas, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain. (5)Department of Experimental and Health
Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Stem cells and Cancer
Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.

SPROUTY-2 (SPRY2) is a modulator of tyrosine kinase receptor signaling with
receptor- and cell type-dependent inhibitory or enhancing effects. Studies on the
action of SPRY2 in major cancers are conflicting and its role remains unclear.
Here we have dissected SPRY2 action in human colon cancer. Global transcriptomic 
analyses show that SPRY2 downregulates genes encoding tight junction proteins
such as claudin-7 and occludin and other cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix adhesion
molecules in human SW480-ADH colon carcinoma cells. Moreover, SPRY2 represses
LLGL2/HUGL2, PATJ1/INADL and ST14, main regulators of the polarized epithelial
phenotype, and ESRP1, an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) inhibitor. A 
key action of SPRY2 is the upregulation of the major EMT inducer ZEB1, as these
effects are reversed by ZEB1 knock-down by means of RNA interference.
Consistently, we found an inverse correlation between the expression level of
claudin-7 and those of SPRY2 and ZEB1 in human colon tumors. Mechanistically,
ZEB1 upregulation by SPRY2 results from the combined induction of ETS1
transcription factor and the repression of microRNAs (miR-200 family, miR-150)
that target ZEB1 RNA. Moreover, SPRY2 increased AKT activation by epidermal
growth factor, whereas AKT and also Src inhibition reduced the induction of ZEB1.
Altogether, these data suggest that AKT and Src are implicated in SPRY2 action.
Collectively, these results show a tumorigenic role of SPRY2 in colon cancer that
is based on the dysregulation of tight junction and epithelial polarity master
genes via upregulation of ZEB1. The dissection of the mechanism of action of
SPRY2 in colon cancer cells is important to understand the upregulation of this
gene in a subset of patients with this neoplasia that have poor
prognosis.Oncogene advance online publication, 12 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.366.

PMID: 26455323  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


120. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):32039-60. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5055.

PI3K/AKT/mTOR and sonic hedgehog pathways cooperate together to inhibit human
pancreatic cancer stem cell characteristics and tumor growth.

Sharma N(1), Nanta R(1), Sharma J(2), Gunewardena S(3), Singh KP(4), Shankar
S(5,)(6), Srivastava RK(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. (2)Celprogen
Inc. Torrance, CA 90503, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Integrative
Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
(4)Division of Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35205, USA. (5)Kansas City VA Medical Center, 4801
Linwood Boulevard, Kansas City, MO, 66128, USA. (6)Department of Pathology,
University of Missouri-School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, 64108, USA.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) play major roles in cancer initiation, progression, and 
metastasis. It is evident from growing reports that PI3K/Akt/mTOR and Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathways are aberrantly reactivated in pancreatic CSCs. 
Here, we examined the efficacy of combining NVP-LDE-225 (PI3K/mTOR inhibitor) and
NVP-BEZ-235 (Smoothened inhibitor) on pancreatic CSCs characteristics, microRNA
regulatory network, and tumor growth. NVP-LDE-225 co-operated with NVP-BEZ-235 in
inhibiting pancreatic CSC's characteristics and tumor growth in mice by acting at
the level of Gli. Combination of NVP-LDE-225 and NVP-BEZ-235 inhibited
self-renewal capacity of CSCs by suppressing the expression of pluripotency
maintaining factors Nanog, Oct-4, Sox-2 and c-Myc, and transcription of Gli.
NVP-LDE-225 co-operated with NVP-BEZ-235 to inhibit Lin28/Let7a/Kras axis in
pancreatic CSCs. Furthermore, a superior interaction of these drugs was observed 
on spheroid formation by pancreatic CSCs isolated from Pankras/p53 mice. The
combination of these drugs also showed superior effects on the expression of
proteins involved in cell proliferation, survival and apoptosis. In addition,
NVP-LDE-225 co-operated with NVP-BEZ-235 in inhibiting EMT through modulation of 
cadherin, vimentin and transcription factors Snail, Slug and Zeb1. In conclusion,
these data suggest that the combined inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and Shh pathways
may be beneficial for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4741658
PMID: 26451606  [PubMed - in process]


121. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 27;6(33):34288-99. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5924.

Cetuximab promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition and cancer associated
fibroblasts in patients with head and neck cancer.

Schmitz S(1,)(2), Bindea G(3,)(4,)(5), Albu RI(1), Mlecnik B(3,)(4,)(5), Machiels
JP(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Roi Albert II, Department of Medical Oncology, Cliniques
Universitaires Saint-Luc and Institut de Recherche Clinique et Expérimentale
(Pole MIRO), Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Department
of Head and Neck Surgery, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (3)INSERM UMRS1138, Laboratory of
Integrative Cancer Immunology, Paris, France. (4)Université Paris Descartes, Rue 
de l'Ecole de Médecine, Paris, France. (5)Cordeliers Research Centre, Université 
Pierre et Marie Curie Paris, Paris, France.

PURPOSE: To investigate if cetuximab induces epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and activation of cancer associated fibroblast (CAF) in the tumors of
patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN).
METHODS: Cetuximab was administered for two weeks prior to surgery to 20
treatment-naïve patients. Five untreated patients were included as controls.
Tumor biopsies were performed at baseline and before surgery. Gene expression
profiles and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of the pre-and
post-treatment biopsies were compared. To further investigate EMT and CAF,
correlations between previously described EMT and CAF markers and our microarray 
data set were calculated.
RESULTS: Gene expression profile analyses and qRT-PCR showed that some of the
genes modified by cetuximab were related to CAFs and EMT (ZNF521, CXCL12, ASPN,
OLFML3, OLFM1, TWIST1, LEF1, ZEB1, FAP). We identified 2 patient clusters with
different EMT and CAF characteristics. Whereas one cluster showed clear
upregulation of expression of genes implicated in CAF and EMT including markers
of embryologic pathways like NOTCH and Wnt, the other did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Even if EMT and CAFs are implicated in cetuximab resistance in
pre-clinical models, we demonstrate for the first time that these molecular
processes may occur clinically early on.

PMCID: PMC4741452
PMID: 26437222  [PubMed - in process]


122. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 1;5:14697. doi: 10.1038/srep14697.

A robust screening method for dietary agents that activate tumour-suppressor
microRNAs.

Hagiwara K(1,)(2), Gailhouste L(1), Yasukawa K(1,)(3), Kosaka N(1), Ochiya T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (2)Department of
Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho,
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. (3)Integrative Bioscience and Biomedical
Engineering, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2
Wakamatsu, Shinjuku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.

Certain dietary agents, such as natural products, have been reported to show
anti-cancer effects. However, the underlying mechanisms of these substances in
human cancer remain unclear. We recently found that resveratrol exerts an
anti-cancer effect by upregulating tumour-suppressor microRNAs (miRNAs). In the
current study, we aimed to identify new dietary products that have the ability to
activate tumour-suppressor miRNAs and that therefore may serve as novel tools for
the prevention and treatment of human cancers. We describe the generation and use
of an original screening system based on a luciferase-based reporter vector for
monitoring miR-200c tumour-suppressor activity. By screening a library containing
139 natural substances, three natural compounds - enoxolone, magnolol and
palmatine chloride - were identified as being capable of inducing miR-200c
expression in breast cancer cells at 10 µM. Moreover, these molecules suppressed 
the invasiveness of breast cancer cells in vitro. Next, we identified a molecular
pathway by which the increased expression of miR-200c induced by natural
substances led to ZEB1 inhibition and E-cadherin induction. These results
indicate that our method is a valuable tool for a fast identification of natural 
molecules that exhibit tumour-suppressor activity in human cancer through miRNA
activation.

PMCID: PMC4589759
PMID: 26423775  [PubMed - in process]


123. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 23;5:14331. doi: 10.1038/srep14331.

Down-regulation of microRNA-144 in air pollution-related lung cancer.

Pan HL(1), Wen ZS(2), Huang YC(3), Cheng X(1), Wang GZ(1), Zhou YC(3), Wang
ZY(4), Guo YQ(4), Cao Y(5), Zhou GB(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences &Graduate School of the University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, the Cancer Hospital,
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510060. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, the 
Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Yunnan Tumor Hospital), 
Kunming 650106, China. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, China-Japan Friendship 
Hospital, Beijing 100029. (5)Laboratory of Molecular and Experimental Pathology, 
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China.

Air pollution has been classified as a group 1 carcinogen in humans, but the
underlying tumourigenic mechanisms remain unclear. In Xuanwei city of Yunnan
Province, the lung cancer incidence is among the highest in China, owing to
severe air pollution generated by the combustion of smoky coal, providing a
unique opportunity to dissect lung carcinogenesis. To identify abnormal miRNAs
critical for air pollution-related tumourigenesis, we performed microRNA
microarray analysis in 6 Xuanwei non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) and 4
NSCLCs from control regions where smoky coal was not used. We found 13
down-regulated and 2 up-regulated miRNAs in Xuanwei NSCLCs. Among them, miR-144
was one of the most significantly down-regulated miRNAs. The expanded experiments
showed that miR-144 was down-regulated in 45/51 (88.2%) Xuanwei NSCLCs and 34/54 
(63%) control region NSCLCs (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016). MiR-144 interacted with the oncogene
Zeb1 at 2 sites in its 3' untranslated region, and a decrease in miR-144 resulted
in increased Zeb1 expression and an epithelial mesenchymal transition phenotype. 
Ectopic expression of miR-144 suppressed NSCLCs in vitro and in vivo by targeting
Zeb1. These results indicate that down-regulation of miR-144 is critical for air 
pollution-related lung cancer, and the miR-144-Zeb1 signalling pathway could
represent a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4585805
PMID: 26395400  [PubMed - in process]


124. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 12;34(46):5760-70. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.352. Epub 2015 Sep
21.

ZEB1 and TCF4 reciprocally modulate their transcriptional activities to regulate 
Wnt target gene expression.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), de Barrios O(1), Valls E(1), Darling DS(2), Castells
A(3,)(4), Postigo A(1,)(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology
and Hematology, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department of Oral Immunology and
Infectious Diseases and Center for Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA. (3)Institute of Metabolic and Digestive
Diseases, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Gastrointestinal and Pancreatic
Oncology Team, Biomedical Research Networking Centers in Hepatic and Digestive
Diseases (CIBERehd), Carlos III Health Institute (ISCIII), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Louisville, KY, USA. (6)ICREA, Barcelona,
Spain.

The canonical Wnt pathway (TCF4/ß-catenin) has important roles during normal
differentiation and in disease. Some Wnt functions depend on signaling gradients 
requiring the pathway to be tightly regulated. A key Wnt target is the
transcription factor ZEB1 whose expression by cancer cells promotes tumor
invasiveness by repressing the expression of epithelial specification markers and
activating mesenchymal genes, including a number of Wnt targets such as LAMC2 and
uPA. The ability of ZEB1 to activate/repress its target genes depends on its
recruitment of corepressors (CtBP, BRG1) or coactivators (p300) although
conditions under which ZEB1 binds these cofactors are not elucidated. Here, we
show that TCF4 and ZEB1 reciprocally modulate each other's transcriptional
activity: ZEB1 enhances TCF4/ß-catenin-mediated transcription and, in turn, Wnt
signaling switches ZEB1 from a repressor into an activator. In colorectal cancer 
(CRC) cells with active Wnt signaling, ZEB1 enhances transcriptional activation
of LAMC2 and uPA by TCF4/ß-catenin. However, in CRC cells with inactive Wnt, ZEB1
represses both genes. Reciprocal modulation of ZEB1 and TCF4 activities involves 
their binding to DNA and mutual interaction. Wnt signaling turns ZEB1 into an
activator by replacing binding of CtBP/BRG1 in favor of p300. Using a mouse model
of Wnt-induced intestinal tumorigenesis, we found that downregulation of ZEB1
reduces the expression of LAMC2 in vivo. These results identify a mechanism
through which Wnt and ZEB1 transcriptional activities are modulated, offering new
approaches in cancer therapy.

PMID: 26387539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Comp Pathol. 2015 Nov;153(4):256-65. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2015.08.006. Epub 2015
Sep 16.

The Relationship Between E-Cadherin and its Transcriptional Repressors in
Spontaneously Arising Canine Invasive Micropapillary Mammary Carcinoma.

Gamba CO(1), Rodrigues MA(2), Gomes DA(3), Estrela-Lima A(4), Ferreira E(1),
Cassali GD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo Horizonte,
Minas Gerais, Brazil. (2)Departamento de Patologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil; Departamento de Bioquímica e Imunologia,
Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av.
Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (3)Departamento de
Bioquímica e Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Patologia e Clínicas, Escola de Medicina Veterinária,
Universidade Federal da Bahia, Av. Adhemar de Barros, 500, Ondina, Salvador,
Bahia, Brazil. (5)Departamento de Patologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: cassalig@icb.ufmg.br.

E-cadherin downregulation is related to metastatic behaviour and a poor prognosis
in cancer. It might be induced by transcriptional repression mediated by the
transcription factors SNAIL, ZEB1, ZEB2 and TWIST. Here, we investigated
E-cadherin expression and its relationship to those transcriptional repressors
(i.e. SNAIL, ZEB1, ZEB2 and TWIST) in the progression from carcinoma 'in situ' to
invasion to lymph node metastasis in spontaneously arising canine invasive
micropapillary carcinoma (IMPC). E-cadherin expression decreased from carcinoma
in situ to invasive progression and was likely to increase with lymph node
metastasis. Expression of SNAIL decreased from carcinoma in situ to invasive
areas and from invasive areas to lymph nodes. Metastatic lymph nodes had higher
expression of ZEB1 than carcinoma in situ and invasive areas. ZEB2 expression was
observed in 52%, 38% and 33% of carcinoma in situ areas, invasive areas and lymph
node metastases, respectively. TWIST expression was observed in 52%, 38% and 33% 
of carcinoma in situ areas, invasive areas and lymph node metastases,
respectively. In invasive areas, E-cadherin downregulation correlated
significantly with SNAIL and TWIST upregulation. Additionally, in infiltrating
components of IMPCs, E-cadherin(-)SNAIL(+) neoplastic epithelial cells were
observed by immunofluorescence. Taken together, canine mammary IMPCs had a loss
of E-cadherin from carcinoma in situ to invasive areas, which appears to be
induced by the transcription factor SNAIL. In lymph node metastasis, ZEB1 appears
to not exert E-cadherin transcriptional repression activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26385325  [PubMed - in process]


126. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Pituitary tumor-transforming gene 1 enhances metastases of cervical cancer cells 
through miR-3666-regulated ZEB1.

Li L(1), Han LY(2), Yu M(3), Zhou Q(4), Xu JC(1), Li P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory, the First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, 130021, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second 
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 130041, China. liying_han15@163.com.
(3)The Affiliated Hospital to Changchun University of Chinese Medicine,
Changchun, 130021, China. (4)Department of Pediatrics, the First Hospital of
Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China. (5)Doctrine Department, Chinese
Medical Schools, Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, 130117,
China.

Early cancer metastases often occur in cervical cancer (CC) patients, resulting
in poor prognosis and poor therapeutic outcome after resection of primary cancer.
Hence, there is a compelling requirement for elucidating the molecular mechanisms
underlying the CC cell invasiveness. Recently, the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) and
pituitary tumor-transforming gene 1 (Pttg1) in the carcinogenesis of CC has been 
reported. Nevertheless, the relationship between miRNAs and Pttg1 remains
ill-defined. Here, we showed that the levels of miR-3666 were significantly
decreased and the levels of zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and Pttg1
were significantly increased in the CC specimens from patients, compared to the
paired non-tumor tissue. Moreover, the levels of miR-3666 and ZEB1 inversely
correlated. Bioinformatics analyses showed that miR-3666 targeted the
3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of ZEB1 messenger RNA (mRNA) to inhibit its
translation, which was confirmed by luciferase reporter assay. Moreover, Pttg1
overexpression inhibited miR-3666 and subsequently increased ZEB1 and cell
invasion, while Pttg1 depletion increased miR-3666 and subsequently decreased
ZEB1 and cell invasion. Together, our data suggest that Pttg1 may increase CC
cell metastasis, possibly through miR-3666-regulated ZEB1 levels.

PMID: 26383522  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


127. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Sep 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Stromal Clues in Endometrial Carcinoma: Loss of Expression of ß-Catenin,
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition Regulators, and Estrogen-Progesterone Receptor.

Senol S(1), Sayar I, Ceyran AB, Ibiloglu I, Akalin I, Firat U, Kosemetin D, Engin
Zerk P, Aydin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (S.S., A.B.C., P.E.Z., A.A.), Faculty of Medicine,
Istanbul Medeniyet University, Goztepe Research and Training Hospital Department 
of Medical Genetics (I.A.), Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul Medeniyet University
Department of Pathology (D.K.), Van Research and Training District Hospital, Van 
Department of Pathology (I.S.), Faculty of Medicine, Erzincan University,
Erzincan Department of Pathology (I.I., U.F.), Faculty of Medicine, Dicle
University, Diyarbakir, Turkey.

Epithelial-stroma interaction of endometrium is known to be responsible either
for physiological functions or emergence of several pathologic lesions.
Periglandular stromal cells act on endometrial cells in a paracrine way
particularly through sex steroids. In this study, we immunohistochemically
evaluated epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulators (SNAIL/SLUG, TWIST, ZEB1),
adhesion molecules (ß-catenin and E-cadhenin), estrogen (ER)-progesterone (PR)
receptor expressions and their correlation with each other in 30 benign, 148
hyperplastic (EH), and 101 endometrioid-type endometrial carcinoma (EC) tissue.
In epithelial component, loss of expression in E-cadherin, ER and PR, and
overexpression of TWIST and ZEB1 were significantly higher in EC than in EH
(P<0.01). In periglandular stromal component, ß-catenin and SNAIL/SLUG
expressions were significantly higher in normal endometrium and simple without
atypical EH compared with complex atypical EH and EC (P<0.01). In addition,
periglandular stromal TWIST expression was significantly higher in EH group
compared with EC (P<0.05). There was significantly negative correlation between
ß-catenin and ER, TWIST and ER, and TWIST and PR in hyperplastic and
carcinomatous glandular epithelium, whereas there was significantly positive
correlation between ß-catenin and SNAIL-SLUG, ß-catenin and TWIST, ß-catenin and 
ER, ß-catenin and PR, SNAIL-SLUG and ER, SNAIL-SLUG and PR, TWIST and ER, TWIST
and PR, in periglandular/cancer-associated stromal cells (P<0.01). In conclusion,
the pattern of positive and negative correlations in the expressions of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulators (SNAIL-SLUG and TWIST), sex steroids
receptors (ER and PR), and ß-catenin between ECs and hyperplasia, as well as
between epithelium and stroma herein, is suggestive of a significant role for
these proteins and their underlying molecular processes in the development of
endometrial carcinomas.This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0
(CCBY-NC-ND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it 
is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially.

PMID: 26367784  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


128. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Apr;117(4):881-93. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25372. Epub 2015 Sep 22.

Ketamine Increases Permeability and Alters Epithelial Phenotype of Renal Distal
Tubular Cells via a GSK-3ß-Dependent Mechanism.

Shyu HY(1,)(2), Ko CJ(1), Luo YC(1), Lin HY(1), Wu SR(1), Lan SW(1), Cheng TS(1),
Hu SH(2), Lee MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Division of Forensic Science,
Bureau of Investigation, Ministry of Justice, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

Ketamine, a dissociative anesthetic, is misused and abused worldwide as an
illegal recreational drug. In addition to its neuropathic toxicity, ketamine
abuse has numerous effects, including renal failure; however, the underlying
mechanism is poorly understood. The process called epithelial phenotypic changes 
(EPCs) causes the loss of cell-cell adhesion and cell polarity in renal diseases,
as well as the acquisition of migratory and invasive properties. Madin-Darby
canine kidney cells, an in vitro cell model, were subjected to experimental
manipulation to investigate whether ketamine could promote EPCs. Our data showed 
that ketamine dramatically decreased transepithelial electrical resistance and
increased paracellular permeability and junction disruption, which were coupled
to decreased levels of apical junctional proteins (ZO-1, occludin, and
E-cadherin). Consistent with the downregulation of epithelial markers, the
mesenchymal markers N-cadherin, fibronectin, and vimentin were markedly
upregulated following ketamine stimulation. Of the E-cadherin repressor complexes
tested, the mRNA levels of Snail, Slug, Twist, and ZEB1 were elevated. Moreover, 
ketamine significantly enhanced migration and invasion. Ketamine-mediated changes
were at least partly caused by the inhibition of GSK-3ß activity through Ser-9
phosphorylation by the PI3K/Akt pathway. Inhibiting PI3K/Akt with LY294002
reactivated GSK-3ß and suppressed ketamine-enhanced permeability, EPCs, and
motility. These findings were recapitulated by the inactivation of GSK-3ß using
the inhibitor 3F8. Taken together, these results provide evidence that ketamine
induces renal distal tubular EPCs through the downregulation of several junction 
proteins, the upregulation of mesenchymal markers, the activation of Akt, and the
inactivation of GSK-3ß. J. Cell. Biochem. 117: 881-893, 2016. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26365534  [PubMed - in process]


129. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):29947-62. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4937.

Honokiol activates LKB1-miR-34a axis and antagonizes the oncogenic actions of
leptin in breast cancer.

Avtanski DB(1), Nagalingam A(1), Bonner MY(2), Arbiser JL(2,)(3), Saxena NK(4),
Sharma D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and the
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231, 
USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Winship
Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (3)Atlanta Veterans Administration
Medical Center, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Leptin, a major adipocytokine produced by adipocytes, is emerging as a key
molecule linking obesity with breast cancer therefore, it is important to find
effective strategies to antagonize oncogenic effects of leptin to disrupt
obesity-cancer axis. Here, we examine the potential of honokiol (HNK), a
bioactive polyphenol from Magnolia grandiflora, as a leptin-antagonist and
systematically elucidate the underlying mechanisms. HNK inhibits leptin-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT), and mammosphere-formation along with a
reduction in the expression of stemness factors, Oct4 and Nanog. Investigating
the downstream mediator(s), that direct leptin-antagonist actions of HNK; we
discovered functional interactions between HNK, LKB1 and miR-34a. HNK increases
the expression and cytoplasmic-localization of LKB1 while HNK-induced SIRT1/3
accentuates the cytoplasmic-localization of LKB1. We found that HNK increases
miR-34a in LKB1-dependent manner as LKB1-silencing impedes HNK-induced miR-34a
which can be rescued by LKB1-overexpression. Finally, an integral role of miR-34a
is discovered as miR-34a mimic potentiates HNK-mediated inhibition of EMT, Zeb1
expression and nuclear-localization, mammosphere-formation, and expression of
stemness factors. Leptin-antagonist actions of HNK are further enhanced by
miR-34a mimic whereas miR-34a inhibitor results in inhibiting HNK's effect on
leptin. These data provide evidence for the leptin-antagonist potential of HNK
and reveal the involvement of LKB1 and miR-34a.

PMCID: PMC4745774
PMID: 26359358  [PubMed - in process]


130. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):28949-60. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5027.

Loss of miR-200b promotes invasion via activating the Kindlin-2/integrin ß1/AKT
pathway in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma: An E-cadherin-independent
mechanism.

Zhang HF(1,)(2), Alshareef A(2), Wu C(2), Li S(3), Jiao JW(1), Cao HH(4), Lai
R(2), Xu LY(1,)(4), Li EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for High Cancer Incidence Coastal
Chaoshan Area, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (3)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology,
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China. (4)Institute of Oncologic
Pathology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.

Our previous studies have shown that loss of miR-200b enhances the invasiveness
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells. However, whether the
miR-200-ZEB1/2-E-cadherin regulatory cascade, a master regulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is involved in the regulation of ESCC
invasion remains elusive. Here, we show that miR-200b represses ESCC cell
invasion in vivo without altering the expression of E-cadherin and vimentin, two 
surrogate markers of EMT. However, an inverse correlation was observed between
the expression levels of miR-200b and ZEB1/2 in both ESCC cell lines (n = 7, P < 
0.05) and ESCC tumor samples (n = 88, P < 0.05). Methylation of E-cadherin gene
was found to block the regulation of E-cadherin by the miR-200b-ZEB1/2 axis,
indicating that an E-cadherin-independent mechanism can mediate the biological
function of miR-200b in ESCC. We revealed that miR-200b suppresses the integrin
ß1-AKT pathway via targeting Kindlin-2 to mitigate ESCC cell invasiveness. In two
independent cohorts of ESCC samples (n = 20 and n = 53, respectively), Kindlin-2 
expression positively correlated with the activation status of both the integrin 
signaling pathway and the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway (both P < 0.01). These data 
highlight that suppression of the Kindlin-2-integrin ß1-AKT regulatory axis is an
alternative mechanism underlying the tumor suppressor function of miR-200b in
ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4745703
PMID: 26334393  [PubMed - in process]


131. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):27083-96. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4807.

The ZEB1/miR-200c feedback loop regulates invasion via actin interacting proteins
MYLK and TKS5.

Sundararajan V(1,)(2,)(3), Gengenbacher N(4), Stemmler MP(5), Kleemann JA(5),
Brabletz T(5), Brabletz S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany. (2)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM),
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (3)Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (4)Division of Vascular
Oncology and Metastasis, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance),
Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of Experimental Medicine I,
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental process which is
aberrantly activated during cancer invasion and metastasis. Elevated expression
of EMT-inducers like ZEB1 enables tumor cells to detach from the primary tumor
and invade into the surrounding tissue. The main antagonist of ZEB1 in
controlling EMT is the microRNA-200 family that is reciprocally linked to ZEB1 in
a double negative feedback loop. Here, we further elucidate how the ZEB1/miR-200 
feedback loop controls invasion of tumor cells. The process of EMT is attended by
major changes in the actin cytoskeleton. Via in silico screening of genes
encoding for actin interacting proteins, we identified two novel targets of
miR-200c - TKS5 and MYLK (MLCK). Co-expression of both genes with ZEB1 was
observed in several cancer cell lines as well as in breast cancer patients and
correlated with low miR-200c levels. Depletion of TKS5 or MYLK in breast cancer
cells reduced their invasive potential and their ability to form invadopodia.
Whereas TKS5 is known to be a major component, we could identify MYLK as a novel 
player in invadopodia formation. In summary, TKS5 and MYLK represent two
mediators of invasive behavior of cancer cells that are regulated by the
ZEB1/miR-200 feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC4694975
PMID: 26334100  [PubMed - in process]


132. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 25;21:919-29. eCollection 2015.

EMT-associated factors promote invasive properties of uveal melanoma cells.

Asnaghi L(1), Gezgin G(2), Tripathy A(1), Handa JT(3), Merbs SL(4), van der
Velden PA(2), Jager MJ(2), Harbour JW(5), Eberhart CG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins
University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. (4)Department of Ophthalmology,
Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD ; Department of
Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. (5)Ocular 
Oncology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL. (6)Department of
Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD ;
Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD ; Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

PURPOSE: Transcription factors regulating the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) program contribute to carcinogenesis and metastasis in many
tumors, including cutaneous melanoma. However, little is known about the role of 
EMT factors in the growth and metastatic dissemination of uveal melanoma cells.
Here, we analyzed the expression and functions of the EMT factors ZEB1, Twist1,
and Snail1 in uveal melanoma cell lines and primary tumors.
METHODS: ZEB1, Twist1, and Snail1 mRNA levels were measured using qPCR in five
uveal melanoma cell lines and in 30 primary tumors. Gene expression was used to
determine class 1 and class 2 signatures in the primary tumors. Short hairpin RNA
was used to downregulate the expressions of the EMT factors; then, growth and
transwell invasion assays were performed.
RESULTS: ZEB1, Twist1, and Snail1 were expressed in all five uveal melanoma
lines, with ZEB1 having the highest protein levels. ZEB1 mRNA was significantly
elevated in highly metastatic class 2 primary tumors for which survival data were
not available, whereas a high gene expression of Twist1 was associated with a
worse prognosis in a separate tumor cohort analyzed by expression profiling. The 
genetic downregulation of ZEB1 in OCM1, OMM1, and 92.1 resulted in a more than
50% reduction in invasion, but only suppressed growth in OMM1 cells. Suppression 
of Twist1 in Mel290 and OMM1 reduced growth and invasion by more than 50%. The
downregulation of Snail1 in the 92.1 cell line reduced invasion by 50%, but did
not interfere with growth.
CONCLUSIONS: The downregulation of ZEB1, Twist1, and Snail1 reduces the invasive 
properties of uveal melanoma cells, and the elevated mRNA levels of ZEB1 and
Twist1 are associated with a more aggressive clinical phenotype in uveal melanoma
samples. Therefore, these factors could represent new therapeutic targets in
patients with ocular melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4548792
PMID: 26321866  [PubMed - in process]


133. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):29585-98. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4987.

S100P interacts with integrin a7 and increases cancer cell migration and invasion
in lung cancer.

Hsu YL(1), Hung JY(2,)(3), Liang YY(1), Lin YS(1), Tsai MJ(1,)(2), Chou SH(4), Lu
CY(5), Kuo PL(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)School of 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Chest Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (7)Institute of
Medical Science and Technology, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

S100P, a Ca2+ binding protein, has been shown to be overexpressed in various
cancers. However, its functional character in lung cancer remains largely
unknown. In this study, we show that S100P increases cancer migration, invasion
and metastasis in lung cancer cells. Ectopic expression of S100P increases
migration, invasion and EMT in less invasive CL1-0 lung cancer cells. Conversely,
knockdown of S100P suppressed migration and invasion, and caused a reversion of
EMT in highly invasive lung cancer cells. These effects were transduced by
increasing the interaction of S100P with integrin a7, which activated focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) and AKT. Blocking FAK significantly decreased S100P-induced
migration by decreasing Src and AKT activation, whereas inhibiting AKT reduced
S100P upregulation on ZEB1 expression. Further study has indicated that S100P
knockdown prevents the spread of highly metastatic human lung cancer in animal
models. This study therefore suggests that S100P represents a critical activator 
of lung cancer metastasis. Detection and targeted treatment of S100P-expressing
cancer is an attractive therapeutic strategy in treating lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4745748
PMID: 26320193  [PubMed - in process]


134. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2015;134:73-8. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2015.04.004. Epub 
2015 Jun 4.

Corneal Dystrophies: Overview and Summary.

Schorderet D(1).

Author information: 
(1)IRO - Institute for Research in Ophthalmology, Sion, Switzerland; Faculty of
Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne, Switzerland;
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Electronic address: daniel.schorderet@irovision.ch.

In this chapter, I shall discuss the genetics, mode of inheritance and molecular 
origin of several corneal dystrophies.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26310150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Nov;100(11):E1415-27. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-2134.
Epub 2015 Aug 25.

Activin A Increases Human Trophoblast Invasion by Inducing SNAIL-Mediated MMP2
Up-Regulation Through ALK4.

Li Y(1), Klausen C(1), Zhu H(1), Leung PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Child & Family Research Institute,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada.

CONTEXT: Activin A increases matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 2 expression and cell
invasion in human trophoblasts, but whether the expression of MMP2 is essential
for the proinvasive effect of activin A has yet to be determined. Moreover, the
identity of the activin receptor-like kinase (ALK; TGF-ß type I receptors) and
downstream transcription factors (eg, SNAIL and SLUG) mediating the effects of
activin on MMP2 expression and trophoblast cell invasion remains unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the role of MMP2 in activin A-induced human trophoblast
cell invasion as well as the involvement of ALK4 and SNAIL.
DESIGN: HTR8/SVneo immortalized human extravillous cytotrophoblast (EVT) cells
and primary cultures of human first-trimester EVT cells were used as study
models. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown approaches were used to 
investigate the molecular determinants of activin A-mediated functions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Levels of mRNA and protein were examined by reverse
transcription-quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot, respectively. Cell
invasiveness was measured by Matrigel-coated transwell assays.
RESULTS: Treatment of HTR8/SVneo cells with activin A increased the production of
SNAIL, SLUG, and MMP2 without altering that of MMP9, TIMP1, TIMP2, TWIST, RUNX2, 
ZEB1, or ZEB2. Similarly, activin A up-regulated the mRNA and protein levels of
SNAIL and MMP2 in primary EVT cells. Knockdown of SNAIL attenuated activin
A-induced MMP2 up-regulation in HTR8/SVneo and primary EVT cells. In HTR8/SVneo
cells, activin A-induced production of SNAIL and MMP2 was abolished by
pretreatment with the TGF-ß type I receptor (ALK4/5/7) inhibitor SB431542 or
siRNA targeting ALK4, SMAD2/3, or common SMAD4. Likewise, knockdown of ALK4 or
SMAD4 abolished the stimulatory effects of activin A on SNAIL and MMP2 expression
in primary EVT cells. Importantly, activin A-induced HTR8/SVneo and primary EVT
cell invasion were attenuated by siRNA-mediated depletion of ALK4 or MMP2.
CONCLUSION: Activin A induces human trophoblast cell invasion by inducing
SNAIL-mediated MMP2 expression through ALK4 in a SMAD2/3-SMAD4-dependent manner.

PMID: 26305619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. EMBO Rep. 2015 Oct;16(10):1288-98. doi: 10.15252/embr.201540244. Epub 2015 Aug
24.

UTX inhibits EMT-induced breast CSC properties by epigenetic repression of EMT
genes in cooperation with LSD1 and HDAC1.

Choi HJ(1), Park JH(2), Park M(3), Won HY(1), Joo HS(1), Lee CH(3), Lee JY(4),
Kong G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research (IBBR),
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk University,
Seoul, Korea. (4)Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research
(IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea jy2jy2@hanyang.ac.kr
gkong@hanyang.ac.kr. (5)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical
Research (IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea jy2jy2@hanyang.ac.kr
gkong@hanyang.ac.kr.

The histone H3K27 demethylase, UTX, is a known component of the H3K4
methyltransferase MLL complex, but its functional association with H3K4
methylation in human cancers remains largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that
UTX loss induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-mediated breast cancer
stem cell (CSC) properties by increasing the expression of the SNAIL, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 EMT transcription factors (EMT-TFs) and of the transcriptional repressor
CDH1. UTX facilitates the epigenetic silencing of EMT-TFs by inducing competition
between MLL4 and the H3K4 demethylase LSD1. EMT-TF promoters are occupied by
c-Myc and MLL4, and UTX recognizes these proteins, interrupting their
transcriptional activation function. UTX decreases H3K4me2 and H3 acetylation at 
these promoters by forming a transcriptional repressive complex with LSD1, HDAC1 
and DNMT1. Taken together, our findings indicate that UTX is a prominent tumour
suppressor that functions as a negative regulator of EMT-induced CSC-like
properties by epigenetically repressing EMT-TFs.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4766458 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26303947  [PubMed - in process]


137. Lab Invest. 2015 Nov;95(11):1291-304. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.111. Epub 2015 
Aug 24.

Involvement of ZEB1 and Snail1 in excessive production of extracellular matrix in
Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Okumura N(1,)(2), Minamiyama R(1), Ho LT(1), Kay EP(1), Kawasaki S(2), Tourtas
T(3), Schlötzer-Schrehardt U(3), Kruse FE(3), Young RD(4), Quantock AJ(4),
Kinoshita S(2), Koizumi N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Life and Medical Sciences,
Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, Japan. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (3)Department of Ophthalmology,
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (4)Structural Biophysics
Group, School of Optometry and Vision Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) due to corneal endothelial cell
degeneration is a major cause of corneal transplantation. It is characterized by 
abnormal deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), such as corneal guttae,
accompanied by a loss of endothelial cells. Although recent studies have revealed
several genomic factors, the molecular pathophysiology of FECD has not yet been
revealed. In this study, we establish a cellular in vitro model by using
immortalized corneal endothelial cells obtained from late-onset FECD and control 
patients and examined the involvement of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
on excessive ECM production. We demonstrate that the EMT-inducing genes ZEB1 and 
SNAI1 were highly expressed in corneal endothelial cells in FECD and were
involved in excessive production of ECM proteins, such as type I collagen and
fibronectin through the transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß signaling pathway.
Furthermore, we found that SB431542, a specific inhibitor of TGF-ß type I ALK
receptors, suppressed the expression of ZEB1 and Snail1 followed by reduced
production of ECM. These findings suggest that increased expression levels of
ZEB1 and Snail1 in FECD cells were responsible for an increased responsiveness to
TGF-ß present in the aqueous humor and excessive production of ECM. In addition, 
these results suggest that the regulation of EMT-related genes by blocking the
TGF-ß signaling pathway may be a feasible therapeutic strategy for FECD.

PMID: 26302187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 25;465(3):606-12. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.071. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Identification of a PEAK1/ZEB1 signaling axis during TGFß/fibronectin-induced EMT
in breast cancer.

Agajanian M(1), Runa F(1), Kelber JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, California State University Northridge, Northridge, CA 
91330, USA. (2)Department of Biology, California State University Northridge,
Northridge, CA 91330, USA. Electronic address: jonathan.kelber@csun.edu.

Transforming Growth Factor beta (TGFß) is the archetypal member of the TGFß
superfamily of ligands and has pleiotropic functions during normal development,
adult tissue homeostasis and pathophysiological processes such as cancer. In
epithelial cancers TGFß signaling can either suppress tumor growth or promote
metastasis via the induction of a well-characterized epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) program. We recently reported that PEAK1 kinase mediates
signaling cross talk between TGFß receptors and integrin/Src/MAPK pathways and
functions as a critical molecular regulator of TGFß-induced breast cancer cell
proliferation, migration, EMT and metastasis. Here, we examined the breast cancer
cell contexts in which TGFß induces both EMT and PEAK1, and discovered this event
to be unique to oncogene-transformed mammary epithelial cells and triple-negative
breast cancer cells. Using the Cancer BioPortal database, we identified PEAK1
co-expressors across multiple malignancies that are also common to the TGFß
response gene signature (TBRS). We then used the ScanSite database to identify
predicted protein-protein binding partners of PEAK1 and the PEAK1-TBRS
co-expressors. Analysis of the Cytoscape interactome and Babelomics-derived gene 
ontologies for a novel gene set including PEAK1, CRK, ZEB1, IL11 and COL4A1
enabled us to hypothesize that PEAK1 may be regulating TGFß-induced EMT via its
interaction with or regulation of these other genes. In this regard, we have
demonstrated that PEAK1 is necessary for TGFß to induce ZEB1-mediated EMT in the 
context of fibronectin/ITGB3 activation. These studies and future mechanistic
studies will pave the way toward identifying the context in which TGFß blockade
may significantly improve breast cancer patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26297948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;75(18):3925-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3363. Epub 
2015 Aug 19.

<U+0394>Np63a Promotes Breast Cancer Cell Motility through the Selective Activation of
Components of the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition Program.

Dang TT(1), Esparza MA(1), Maine EA(1), Westcott JM(1), Pearson GW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Harold C. Simmons Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas. (2)Harold C. Simmons Cancer Center, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. Department of Pharmacology,
University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
gray.pearson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Cell identity signals influence the invasive capability of tumor cells, as
demonstrated by the selection for programs of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) during malignant progression. Breast cancer cells retain
canonical epithelial traits and invade collectively as cohesive groups of cells, 
but the signaling pathways critical to their invasive capabilities are still
incompletely understood. Here we report that the transcription factor <U+0394>Np63a
drives the migration of basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) cells by inducing a
hybrid mesenchymal/epithelial state. Through a combination of expression analysis
and functional testing across multiple BLBC cell populations, we determined that 
<U+0394>Np63a induces migration by elevating the expression of the EMT program
components Slug and Axl. Interestingly, <U+0394>Np63a also increased the expression of
miR-205, which can silence ZEB1/2 to prevent the loss of epithelial character
caused by EMT induction. In clinical specimens, co-expression of various elements
of the <U+0394>Np63a pathway confirmed its implication in motility signaling in BLBC. We
observed that activation of the <U+0394>Np63a pathway occurred during the transition
from noninvasive ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive breast cancer. Notably, in 
an orthotopic tumor model, Slug expression was sufficient to induce collective
invasion of E-cadherin-expressing BLBC cells. Together, our results illustrate
how <U+0394>Np63a can drive breast cancer cell invasion by selectively engaging
promigratory components of the EMT program while, in parallel, still promoting
the retention of epithelial character.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4573836 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26292362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Gene. 2015 Dec 15;574(2):330-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.08.017. Epub 2015 Aug
11.

MiR-205 promotes motility of ovarian cancer cells via targeting ZEB1.

Niu K(1), Shen W(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Lu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, First Affiliated Hospital of Chinese
PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100048, China. (2)Department of Gynaecology and
Obstetrics, First Affiliated Hospital of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100048, China. Electronic address: yongx_lu@163.com.

AIM: To investigate the clinical significance of microRNA-205 (miR-205) and zinc 
finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and the
underlying mechanisms by which they are involved into tumorigenesis.
METHODS: Expression levels of miR-205 and ZEB1 mRNA in EOC tissues were detected 
by quantitative real-time PCR. Their associations with clinicopathological
features of EOC patients were statistically analyzed. Luciferase reporter assay
was used to confirm target associations between miR-205 and ZEB1. After that, the
functions of miR-205-ZEB1 axis on cell migration and invasion were further
determined by transwell assay in vitro.
RESULTS: Expression levels of miR-205 (P=0.0001) and ZEB1 mRNA (P<0.0001) in
clinical EOC tissues were significantly higher and lower than those in normal
tissues, respectively. Interestingly, there was a negative correlation between
miR-205 and ZEB1 mRNA expression in EOC tissues (P=0.01). Additionally,
miR-205-upregulation and/or ZEB1-downregulation were significantly associated
with high pathological grade and advanced clinical stage of EOC patients (all
P<0.05). Meantime, luciferase reporter assays identified ZEB1 as a direct target 
of miR-205 in EOC cells. Moreover, miR-205 blockage inhibited, whereas miR-205
mimics promoted the motility of EOC cells in vitro. Importantly, all the
alterations of the above cellular phenotypes by blocking or enhancing of miR-205 
could be alleviated by subsequent suppression or re-introduction of its target
ZEB1, respectively.
CONCLUSION: MiR-205, acting as an oncogenic miRNA, may promote the clinical
progression of EOC patients and enhance the cellular motility in vitro by
directly and negatively regulating ZEB1, providing a potential therapeutic
strategy for suppression of EOC metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26275944  [PubMed - in process]


141. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Nov;36(11):1363-71. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv106. Epub 2015
Aug 11.

miR-544a induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition through the activation of WNT 
signaling pathway in gastric cancer.

Yanaka Y(1), Muramatsu T(2), Uetake H(3), Kozaki K(4), Inazawa J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Department
of Surgical Oncology and. (2)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical
Research Institute. (3)Department of Surgical Oncology and. (4)Department of
Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Bioresource Research Center, 
Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113-8510, Japan, Department of Dental Pharmacology, Okayama University
Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama
University, Okayama 700-8525, Japan and. (5)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics,
Medical Research Institute, Bioresource Research Center, Graduate School, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan, 
Hard Tissue Genome Research Center, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan johinaz.cgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to cancer progression, as
well as the development of normal organs, wound healing and organ fibrosis. We
established a cell-based reporter system for identifying EMT-inducing microRNAs
(miRNAs) with a gastric cancer (GC) cell line, MKN1, transfected with a reporter 
construct containing a promoter sequence of VIM in the 5' upstream region of the 
TurboRFP reporter gene. Function-based screening using this reporter system was
performed with a 328-miRNA library, and resulted in the identification miR-544a
as an EMT-inducing miRNA. Although miR-544a is already known to be involved in
the regulation of CDH1, the mechanism by which EMT occurs remains poorly
understood. Herein, we demonstrated that overexpression of miR-544a induces VIM, 
SNAI1 and ZEB1 expression, and reduces CDH1 expression, resulting in an EMT
phenotype. In addition, we found that CDH1 and AXIN2, which are related to the
degradation and the translocation of ß-catenin, are direct targets of miR-544a.
Subsequently, the reduction of CDH1 and AXIN2 by miR-544a induced the nuclear
import of ß-catenin, suggesting that miR-544a may activate the WNT signaling
pathway through the stabilization of ß-catenin in nucleus. Our findings raise the
possibility that inhibition of miR-544a may be a therapeutic target of metastatic
GC.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26264654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 12;5:13024. doi: 10.1038/srep13024.

Inhibition of ZEB1 expression induces redifferentiation of adult human ß cells
expanded in vitro.

Sintov E(1), Nathan G(1), Knoller S(1), Pasmanik-Chor M(2), Russ HA(1), Efrat
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. (2)Bioinformatics Unit, George
Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

In-vitro expansion of functional adult human ß-cells is an attractive approach
for generating insulin-producing cells for transplantation. However, human islet 
cell expansion in culture results in loss of ß-cell phenotype and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This process activates expression of
ZEB1 and ZEB2, two members of the zinc-finger homeobox family of E-cadherin
repressors, which play key roles in EMT. Downregulation of ZEB1 using shRNA in
expanded ß-cell-derived (BCD) cells induced mesenchymal-epithelial transition
(MET), ß-cell gene expression, and proliferation attenuation. In addition,
inhibition of ZEB1 expression potentiated redifferentiation induced by a
combination of soluble factors, as judged by an improved response to glucose
stimulation and a 3-fold increase in the fraction of C-peptide-positive cells to 
60% of BCD cells. Furthermore, ZEB1 shRNA led to increased insulin secretion in
cells transplanted in vivo. Our findings suggest that the effects of ZEB1
inhibition are mediated by attenuation of the miR-200c target genes SOX6 and
SOX2. These findings, which were reproducible in cells derived from multiple
human donors, emphasize the key role of ZEB1 in EMT in cultured BCD cells and
support the value of ZEB1 inhibition for BCD cell redifferentiation and
generation of functional human ß-like cells for cell therapy of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4532995
PMID: 26264186  [PubMed - in process]


143. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug 5. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-200 suppresses metastases of colorectal cancer through ZEB1.

Sun J(1), Ding W, Zhi J, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Xinhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
JiaoTong University School of Medicine, 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092,
China.

Poor prognosis of some colorectal cancer (CRC) cases largely results from early
metastases of CRC to the distal organs. Thus, suppression of the invasion of CRC 
appears to be crucial therapy. Since microRNAs (miRNAs) play critical roles in
the regulation of cancer metastases, identification of the involved miRNAs may
provide novel therapeutic targets for CRC treatment. Here, we showed that the
levels of miR-200 were significantly decreased and the levels of ZEB1 were
significantly increased in the CRC specimens from patients, compared to the
paired non-tumor tissue. Moreover, the levels of miR-200 and ZEB1 are inversely
correlated. Bioinformatics analyses showed that miR-200 targeted the 3'-UTR of
ZEB1 mRNA to inhibit its translation, which was confirmed by luciferase reporter 
assay. Moreover, miR-200 overexpression inhibited ZEB1-mediated cell
invasiveness, while miR-200 depletion increased ZEB1-mediated cell invasiveness
in CRC cells. Together, our data suggest that miR-200 suppression in CRC cells
may promote ZEB1-mediated cancer metastasis. Our work thus highlights a novel
molecular regulatory machinery that regulates metastases of CRC.

PMID: 26242262  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


144. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2015 Jun;21(6):510-4.

[Expression of ZEB1 in the prepuce of hypospadias children and its implication].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou Y, Qiao L, Li YX, Zhang JM, Liu LD, Lu HK.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of zinc finger E-box binding homebox 1
(ZEB1) in the prepuce of hypospadias children and its relationship to the
incidence of hypospadias.
METHODS: Prepuce tissues were collected from 37 children aged 6-15 months
undergoing hypospadias repair and 11 age-matched controls receiving circumcision.
Based on the position of the urethral meatus, the hypospadias cases were
classified as severe (n = 13) and mild-moderate (n = 24). The mRNA and protein
expressions of ZEB1 were determined by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The expression of the ZEB1 protein was remarkably higher in the severe
(100% [13/13]) and mild-moderate hypospadias patients (75.0% [18/24]) than in the
controls (9.1% [1/11]), with statistically significant differences between any
two groups (P < 0.05). RT-PCR showed the integrated density value (IDV) of the
ZEB1 mRNA expression to be (0.67 ± 0.21), (0.81 ± 0.24), and (1.55 ± 0.29) in the
control, mild-moderate, and severe hypospadias patients, respectively,
significantly higher in the severe hypospadias than in the control and
mild-moderate hypospadias groups (P < 0.05), but with no significant difference
between the latter two (P = 0.64).
CONCLUSION: The expression of ZEB1 is significantly increased in hypospadias
patients, and its upregulation is positively correlated with the severity of
hypospadias, which suggests that the overexpression of ZEB1 may contribute to the
development of hypospadias.

PMID: 26242040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 27;10(7):e0134045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134045.
eCollection 2015.

Co-Expression of TWIST1 and ZEB2 in Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma Is Associated
with Poor Survival.

Kong YH(1), Syed Zanaruddin SN(2), Lau SH(3), Ramanathan A(4), Kallarakkal TG(4),
Vincent-Chong VK(5), Wan Mustafa WM(6), Abraham MT(7), Abdul Rahman ZA(4), Zain
RB(4), Cheong SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oro-maxillofacial Surgery and Medical Sciences, Faculty of
Dentistry, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Oral Cancer Research
Team, Cancer Research Initiatives Foundation, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Oral Cancer Research Team, Cancer Research Initiatives Foundation, Subang
Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia. (3)Stomatology Unit, Institute for Medical Research,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (4)Department of Oro-maxillofacial Surgery and Medical
Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia;
Oral Cancer Research & Coordinating Centre, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. (5)Oral Cancer Research & Coordinating Centre, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (6)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Hospital
Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (7)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial
Surgery, Tengku Ampuan Rahimah Hospital, Klang, Malaysia.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is an aggressive disease accounting for more 
than 260,000 cancer cases diagnosed and 128,000 deaths worldwide. A large
majority of cancer deaths result from cancers that have metastasized beyond the
primary tumor. The relationship between genetic changes and clinical outcome can 
reflect the biological events that promote cancer's aggressive behavior, and
these can serve as molecular markers for improved patient management and
survival. To this end, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a major process
that promotes tumor invasion and metastasis, making EMT-related proteins
attractive diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets. In this study, we used 
immunohistochemistry to study the expression of a panel of transcription factors 
(TWIST1, SNAI1/2, ZEB1 and ZEB2) and other genes intimately related to EMT (CDH1 
and LAMC2) at the invasive tumor front of OSCC tissues. The association between
the expression of these proteins and clinico-pathological parameters were
examined with Pearson Chi-square and correlation with survival was analyzed using
Kaplan Meier analysis. Our results demonstrate that there was a significant
differential expression of CDH1, LAMC2, SNAI1/2 and TWIST1 between OSCC and
normal oral mucosa (NOM). Specifically, CDH1 loss was significantly associated
with Broder's grading, while diffused LAMC2 was similarly associated with
non-cohesive pattern of invasion. Notably, co-expression of TWIST1 and ZEB2 in
OSCC was significantly associated with poorer overall survival, particularly in
patients without detectable lymph node metastasis. This study demonstrates that
EMT-related proteins are differentially expressed in OSCC and that the
co-expression of TWIST1 and ZEB2 could be of clinical value in identifying
patients with poor survival for appropriate patient management.

PMCID: PMC4516250
PMID: 26214683  [PubMed - in process]


146. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Jul 24. doi: 10.1002/mc.22358. [Epub ahead of print]

Mammaglobin 1 promotes breast cancer malignancy and confers sensitivity to
anticancer drugs.

Picot N(1,)(2), Guerrette R(1,)(2), Beauregard AP(1,)(2), Jean S(1,)(2), Michaud 
P(1,)(2), Harquail J(1,)(2), Benzina S(1,)(2), Robichaud GA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Chimie et Biochimie, Université de Moncton, Moncton, New
Brunswick, Canada. (2)Atlantic Cancer Research Institute, Moncton, New Brunswick,
Canada.

Mammaglobin 1 (MGB1), a member of the secretoglobin family, is expressed in
mammary epithelial tissues and is overexpressed in most mammary carcinomas.
Despite the extensive research correlating MGB1 expression profiles to breast
cancer pathogenesis and disease outcome, the biological significance of MGB1 in
cancer processes is still unclear. We have thus set out to conduct a functional
evaluation of the molecular and cellular roles of MGB1 in breast cancer processes
leading to disease progression. Using a series of breast cancer cell models with 
conditional MGB1 expression, we demonstrate that MGB1 promotes cancer cell
malignant features. More specifically, loss of MGB1 expression resulted in a
decrease of cell proliferation, soft agar spheroid formation, migration, and
invasion capacities of breast cancer cells. Concomitantly, we also observed that 
MGB1 expression activates signaling pathways mediated by MAPK members (p38, JNK, 
and ERK), the focal adhesion kinase (FAK), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and
NF<U+03BA>B. Moreover, MGB1 regulates epithelial to mesenchymal (EMT) features and
modulates Snail, Twist and ZEB1 expression levels. Interestingly, we also
observed that expression of MGB1 confers breast cancer cell sensitivity to
anticancer drug-induced apoptosis. Together, our results support a role for MGB1 
in tumor malignancy in exchange for chemosensitivity. These findings provide one 
of the first descriptive overview of the molecular and cellular roles of MGB1 in 
breast cancer processes and may offer new insight to the development of
therapeutic and prognostic strategies in breast cancer patients. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26207726  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


147. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 24;10(7):e0132710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132710.
eCollection 2015.

Inflammation Mediated Metastasis: Immune Induced Epithelial-To-Mesenchymal
Transition in Inflammatory Breast Cancer Cells.

Cohen EN(1), Gao H(2), Anfossi S(1), Mego M(3), Reddy NG(4), Debeb B(5), Giordano
A(2), Tin S(1), Wu Q(2), Garza RJ(2), Cristofanilli M(6), Mani SA(7), Croix
DA(8), Ueno NT(9), Woodward WA(10), Luthra R(4), Krishnamurthy S(11), Reuben
JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America; The Morgan Welch Inflammatory
Breast Cancer Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America; The University of Texas 
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department
of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas, United States of America; The Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)National Cancer Institute,
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (4)Department of Hematopathology, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America; The Morgan Welch Inflammatory
Breast Cancer Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (6)Medical Oncology,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America.
(7)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America; The University of Texas Graduate School
of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (8)Roche Diagnostics,
Indianapolis, IN, United States of America. (9)Department of Breast Medical
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States of America; The Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research
Program and Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas, United States of America; The University of Texas Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences at Houston, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (10)Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States of America; The Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research
Program and Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas, United States of America; The University of Texas Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences at Houston, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (11)Department of Pathology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States 
of America; The Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research Program and
Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United
States of America.

Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most insidious form of locally advanced
breast cancer; about a third of patients have distant metastasis at initial
staging. Emerging evidence suggests that host factors in the tumor
microenvironment may interact with underlying IBC cells to make them aggressive. 
It is unknown whether immune cells associated to the IBC microenvironment play a 
role in this scenario to transiently promote epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in these cells. We hypothesized that soluble factors secreted by activated 
immune cells can induce an EMT in IBC and thus promote metastasis. In a pilot
study of 16 breast cancer patients, TNF-a production by peripheral blood T cells 
was correlated with the detection of circulating tumor cells expressing EMT
markers. In a variety of IBC model cell lines, soluble factors from activated T
cells induced expression of EMT-related genes, including FN1, VIM, TGM2, ZEB1.
Interestingly, although IBC cells exhibited increased invasion and migration
following exposure to immune factors, the expression of E-cadherin (CDH1), a cell
adhesion molecule, increased uniquely in IBC cell lines but not in non-IBC cell
lines. A combination of TNF-a, IL-6, and TGF-ß was able to recapitulate EMT
induction in IBC, and conditioned media preloaded with neutralizing antibodies
against these factors exhibited decreased EMT. These data suggest that release of
cytokines by activated immune cells may contribute to the aggressiveness of IBC
and highlight these factors as potential target mediators of immune-IBC
interaction.

PMCID: PMC4514595
PMID: 26207636  [PubMed - in process]


148. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22409-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.636068. Epub
2015 Jul 22.

The miR-200 family and its targets regulate type II cell differentiation in human
fetal lung.

Benlhabib H(1), Guo W(1), Pierce BM(1), Mendelson CR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Obstetrics and Gynecology, North
Texas March of Dimes Birth Defects Center, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038. (2)From the Departments of Biochemistry
and Obstetrics and Gynecology, North Texas March of Dimes Birth Defects Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038
carole.mendelson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Type II cell differentiation and expression of the major surfactant protein,
SP-A, in mid-gestation human fetal lung (HFL) are induced by cAMP and inhibited
by TGF-ß. cAMP induction of SP-A promoter activity is mediated by increased
phosphorylation and DNA binding of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1/Nkx2.1),
a master regulator of lung development. To further define mechanisms for
developmental induction of surfactant synthesis in HFL, herein, we investigated
the potential roles of microRNAs (miRNAs, miRs). To identify and characterize
differentially regulated miRNAs in mid-gestation HFL explants during type II
pneumocyte differentiation in culture, we performed miRNA microarray of RNA from 
epithelial cells isolated from mid-gestation HFL explants before and after
culture with or without Bt2cAMP. Interestingly, the miR-200 family was
significantly up-regulated during type II cell differentiation; miR-200 induction
was inversely correlated with expression of known targets, transcription factors 
ZEB1/2 and TGF-ß2. miR-200 antagonists inhibited TTF-1 and surfactant proteins
and up-regulated TGF-ß2 and ZEB1 expression in type II cells. Overexpression of
ZEB1 in type II cells decreased DNA binding of endogenous TTF-1, blocked cAMP
stimulation of surfactant proteins, and inhibited miR-200 expression, whereas
cAMP markedly inhibited ZEB1/2 and TGF-ß. Importantly, overexpression of ZEB1 or 
miR-200 antagonists in HFL type II cells also inhibited LPCAT1 and ABCA3, enzymes
involved in surfactant phospholipid synthesis and trafficking, and blocked
lamellar body biogenesis. Our findings suggest that the miR-200 family and ZEB1, 
which exist in a double-negative feedback loop regulated by TGF-ß, serve
important roles in the developmental regulation of type II cell differentiation
and function in HFL.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566216 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26203191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nanomedicine. 2015 Nov;11(8):2061-70. doi: 10.1016/j.nano.2015.07.001. Epub 2015 
Jul 19.

Anthothecol-encapsulated PLGA nanoparticles inhibit pancreatic cancer stem cell
growth by modulating sonic hedgehog pathway.

Verma RK(1), Yu W(1), Singh SP(2), Shankar S(3), Srivastava RK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kansas City VA Medical Center, Kansas City, MO, USA. (2)Centre of
Bioinformatics (IIDS), University of Allahabad, Allahabad, UP, India. (3)Kansas
City VA Medical Center, Kansas City, MO, USA; Department of Pathology, University
of Missouri-School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, USA. (4)Kansas City VA Medical
Center, Kansas City, MO, USA. Electronic address: rsrivastava.lab@gmail.com.

Anthothecol, a limonoid isolated from plant Khaya anthotheca (Meliaceae), is an
antimalarial compound. The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular
mechanisms by which anthothecol-encapsulated PLGA-nanoparticles (Antho-NPs)
regulate the behavior of pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs). Antho-NPs inhibited
cell proliferation and colony formation, and induced apoptosis in pancreatic CSCs
and cancer cell lines, but had no effects on human normal pancreatic ductal
epithelial cells. Antho-NPs inhibited self-renewal capacity of pancreatic CSCs
isolated from human and Kras(G12D) mice. Furthermore, antho-NPs suppressed cell
motility, migration and invasion by up-regulating E-cadherin and inhibiting
N-cadherin and Zeb1. In addition, Antho-NPs inhibited pluripotency maintaining
factors and stem cell markers, suggesting their inhibitory role on CSC
population. Anthothecol disrupted binding of Gli to DNA, and inhibited Gli
transcription and Gli target genes. Our studies establish preclinical
significance of Antho-NPs for the treatment and/or prevention of pancreatic
cancer.FROM THE CLINICAL EDITOR: Despite medical advances, the prognosis of
pancreatic cancer remains poor. The search for an effective treatment has been
under intensive research for some time. In this article, the authors investigated
the efficacy and mechanism of anthothecol (an antimalarial compound),
encapsulated by PLGA nanoparticles (Antho-NPs), against pancreatic cancer cell
lines. It was found that Antho-NPs acted via the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway
and inhibited cancer stem cell growth. These results have provided important
basis for further clinical trials.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26199979  [PubMed - in process]


150. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 22;6:7821. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8821.

DOT1L cooperates with the c-Myc-p300 complex to epigenetically derepress CDH1
transcription factors in breast cancer progression.

Cho MH(1), Park JH(2), Choi HJ(1), Park MK(3), Won HY(1), Park YJ(1), Lee CH(3), 
Oh SH(4), Song YS(1), Kim HS(1), Oh YH(1), Lee JY(2), Kong G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, Korea. (2)Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research
(IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk
University, Seoul 100-715, Korea. (4)College of Pharmacy, Gachon University,
Incheon 405-840, Republic of Korea. (5)1] Department of Pathology, College of
Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea [2] Institute for
Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research (IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, Korea.

DOT1L has emerged as an anticancer target for MLL-associated leukaemias; however,
its functional role in solid tumours is largely unknown. Here we identify that
DOT1L cooperates with c-Myc and p300 acetyltransferase to epigenetically activate
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulators in breast cancer progression. 
DOT1L recognizes SNAIL, ZEB1 and ZEB2 promoters via interacting with the
c-Myc-p300 complex and facilitates lysine-79 methylation and acetylation towards 
histone H3, leading to the dissociation of HDAC1 and DNMT1 in the regions. The
upregulation of these EMT regulators by the DOT1L-c-Myc-p300 complex enhances
EMT-induced breast cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties. Furthermore, in vivo
orthotopic xenograft models show that DOT1L is required for malignant
transformation of breast epithelial cells and breast tumour initiation and
metastasis. Clinically, DOT1L expression is associated with poorer survival and
aggressiveness of breast cancers. Collectively, we suggest that cooperative
effect of DOT1L and c-Myc-p300 is critical for acquisition of aggressive
phenotype of breast cancer by promoting EMT/CSC.

PMCID: PMC4525167
PMID: 26199140  [PubMed - in process]


151. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jul 22;15:533. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1548-7.

Relationship between circulating tumor cells and epithelial to mesenchymal
transition in early breast cancer.

Mego M(1,)(2,)(3), Cierna Z(4), Janega P(5,)(6), Karaba M(7), Minarik G(8), Benca
J(9), Sedlácková T(10), Sieberova G(11), Gronesova P(12), Manasova D(13), Pindak 
D(14,)(15), Sufliarsky J(16,)(17), Danihel L(18), Reuben JM(19), Mardiak
J(20,)(21).

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University and
National Cancer Institute, Klenova 1, 833 10, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
misomego@gmail.com. (2)Translational Research Unit, Bratislava, Slovakia.
misomego@gmail.com. (3)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
misomego@gmail.com. (4)Department of Pathology, Bratislava, Slovakia.
ciernaz@gmail.com. (5)Department of Pathology, Bratislava, Slovakia.
pavol.janega@fmed.uniba.sk. (6)Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology,
Bratislava, Slovakia. pavol.janega@fmed.uniba.sk. (7)National Cancer Institute,
Bratislava, Slovakia. marian.karaba@nou.sk. (8)Institute of Molecular
Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
gabriel.minarik@gmail.com. (9)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
juraj.benca@nou.sk. (10)Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. tatiana.sedlackova@gmail.com.
(11)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
gabriela.sieberova@gmail.com. (12)Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. paulina.gronesova@gmail.com. (13)Translational
Research Unit, Bratislava, Slovakia. d.manasova@gmail.com. (14)National Cancer
Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. daniel.pindak@nou.sk. (15)Slovak Medical
University, Bratislava, Slovakia. daniel.pindak@nou.sk. (16)2nd Department of
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University and National Cancer Institute,
Klenova 1, 833 10, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. jozef.sufliarsky@nou.sk.
(17)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. jozef.sufliarsky@nou.sk.
(18)Department of Pathology, Bratislava, Slovakia. ludovit.danihel@fmed.uniba.sk.
(19)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. jreuben@mdanderson.org. (20)2nd Department of Oncology,
Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University and National Cancer Institute, Klenova
1, 833 10, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. jozef.mardiak@nou.sk. (21)National Cancer
Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. jozef.mardiak@nou.sk.

BACKGROUND: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) play a crucial role in tumor
dissemination and are an independent survival predictor in breast cancer (BC)
patients. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in cancer
invasion and metastasis. The aim of this study was to assess correlation between 
CTCs and expression of EMT transcription factors TWIST1 and SLUG in breast tumor 
tissue.
METHODS: This study included 102 early BC patients treated by primary surgery.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were depleted of hematopoietic cells
using RossetteSep negative selection kit. RNA extracted from CD45-depleted PBMC 
was interrogated for expression of EMT (TWIST1, SNAIL1, SLUG, FOXC2 and ZEB1) and
epithelial (KRT19) gene transcripts by qRT-PCR. Expression of TWIST1 and SLUG in 
surgical specimens was evaluated by immunohistochemistry and quantified by
multiplicative score.
RESULTS: CTCs were detected in 24.5 % patients. CTCs exhibiting only epithelial
markers were present in 8.8 % patients, whereas CTCs with only EMT markers were
observed in 12.8 % of pts and CTCs co-expressing both markers were detected in
2.9 % pts. We observed lack of correlation between CTCs and expression of TWIST1 
and SLUG in breast cancer cells or cancer associated stroma. Lack of correlation 
was observed for epithelial CTCs as well as for CTCs with EMT.
CONCLUSIONS: In this translational study, we showed a lack of association between
CTCs and expression of EMT-inducing transcription factors, TWIST1 and SLUG, in
breast tumor tissue. Despite the fact that EMT is involved in cancer invasion and
metastasis our results suggest, that expression of EMT proteins in unselected
tumor tissue is not surrogate marker of CTCs with either mesenchymal or
epithelial features.

PMCID: PMC4509773
PMID: 26194471  [PubMed - in process]


152. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 17;16(7):16313-29. doi: 10.3390/ijms160716313.

The Wnt11 Signaling Pathway in Potential Cellular EMT and Osteochondral
Differentiation Progression in Nephrolithiasis Formation.

He D(1), Lu Y(2), Hu H(3), Zhang J(4), Qin B(5), Wang Y(6), Xing S(7), Xi Q(8),
Wang S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei, China.
hedeng2002@163.com. (2)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical
College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei,
China. luyuchao@hust.edu.cn. (3)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji 
Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030,
Hubei, China. m201275806@hust.edu.cn. (4)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital
of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, Hubei, China. medzjq@163.com. (5)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital
of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, Hubei, China. qinbaolong@hust.edu.cn. (6)Department of Urology, Tongji
Hospital of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei, China. yfwangtjm@163.com. (7)Department of
Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei, China.
xingshuai529378226@126.com. (8)Department of Urology, the First Af<U+FB01>liated
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, Jiangsu, China.
linqix_827@163.com. (9)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical
College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei,
China. sgwangtjm@163.com.

The molecular events leading to nephrolithiasis are extremely complex. Previous
studies demonstrated that calcium and transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) may 
participate in the pathogenesis of stone formation, but the explicit mechanism
has not been defined. Using a self-created genetic hypercalciuric stone-forming
(GHS) rat model, we observed that the increased level of serous/uric TGF-ß1 and
elevated intracellular calcium in primary renal tubular epithelial cells (PRECs) 
was associated with nephrolithiasis progression in vivo. In the setting of high
calcium plus high TGF-ß1 in vitro, PRECs showed great potential epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) progression and osteochondral differentiation
properties, representing the multifarious increased mesenchymal and osteochondral
phenotypes (Zeb1, Snail1, Col2A1, OPN, Sox9, Runx2) and decreased epithelial
phenotypes (E-cadherin, CK19) bythe detection of mRNAs and corresponding
proteins. Moreover, TGF-ß-dependent Wnt11 knockdown and L-type Ca2+ channel
blocker could greatly reverse EMT progression and osteochondral differentiation
in PRECs. TGF-ß1 alone could effectively promote EMT, but it had no effect on
osteochondral differentiation in NRK cells (Rat kidney epithelial cell line).
Stimulation with Ca2+ alone did not accelerate differentiation of NRK.
Co-incubation of extracellular Ca2+ and TGF-ß1 synergistically promotes EMT and
osteochondral differentiation in NRK control cells. Our data supplied a novel
view that the pathogenesis of calcium stone development may be associated with
synergic effects of TGF-ß1 and Ca2+, which promote EMT and osteochondral
differentiation via Wnt11 and the L-type calcium channel.

PMCID: PMC4519952
PMID: 26193266  [PubMed - in process]


153. Toxicol Res. 2015 Jun;31(2):151-6. doi: 10.5487/TR.2015.31.2.151.

Epithelial-mesenchymal Transition is Associated with Acquired Resistance to
5-Fluorocuracil in HT-29 Colon Cancer Cells.

Kim AY(1), Kwak JH(2), Je NK(1), Lee YH(3), Jung YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Pusan National University, Busan, Korea. (2)College of
Pharmacy, Kyungsung University, Busan, Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Yonsei
University, Incheon, Korea.

5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is commonly used for the therapy of colon cancer; however, 
acquired resistance to 5-FU is a critical barrier to successful treatment and the
primary cause of chemotherapy failure. Epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) is 
a process whereby cells undergo alterations in morphology and molecular
characteristics promoting tumor progression and metastasis. Accumulating evidence
shows that transition from epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype in cancer cells is
associated with their resistance to chemotherapy. However, it is still poorly
understood whether EMT is involved in acquired resistance to 5-FU. In this study,
we developed an in vitro cell model, 5-FU-resistant HT-29 colon cancer cells, and
characterized the differences in cellular morphology and molecular alterations
between parental and resistant cells. In accord with mesenchymal-like morphology 
of 5-FU-resistant HT-29 cells, the expression of the mesenchymal marker
fibronectin was significantly increased in these cells in comparision with that
in the parental cells. Of interest, we also found a marked increase in the
expression of EMT-inducing transcription factors Twist, Zeb1, and Zeb2. Finally, 
5-FU-resistant cells showed enhanced migration in comparison with parental HT-29.
Taken together, these results indicate that EMT could be associated with 5-FU
resistance acquired by HT-29 cells. A specific role of each transcription factor 
found in this study will require further investigation.

PMCID: PMC4505345
PMID: 26191381  [PubMed]


154. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):5960-7. eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-144 regulates proliferation, invasion, and apoptosis of cells in
malignant solitary pulmonary nodule via zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1.

Zhang G(1), An H(2), Fang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, General Hospital of Chinese People's
Liberation Army Beijing 100853, P. R. China. (2)Center of Basic Medical Sciences,
Navy General Hospital of People's Liberation Army Beijing 100048, P. R. China.

AIMS: This study was to investigate the expression of microRNA (miR)-144 in
malignant solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) tissues and peripheral blood, as well
as the biological function of miR-144 in the occurrence and development of lung
cancer.
METHODS: In this study, 39 malignant and 30 benign SPN patients were included.
The expression of miR-144 was examined using quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to
identify the clinical value of miR-144 in the early diagnosis of malignant SPN.
MTT assay was performed to determine A549 cell proliferation and Transwell assay 
was used to detect changes in A549 cell invasion and migration ability. Flow
cytometry was performed to monitor cell apoptosis, while Western blotting assay
was used to measure protein expression levels. At last, dual-luciferase reporter 
assay was employed to test whether miR-144 regulates zinc finger E-box-binding
homeobox 1 (ZEB1) gene expression.
RESULTS: Expression of miR-144 was reduced in patients with malignant SPN.
miR-144 had diagnostic value for malignant SPN. Proliferation of A549 cells was
inhibited by miR-144. Invasion ability of A549 cells was reduced by miR-144.
Apoptosis of A549 cells was promoted by miR-144. miR-144 induced A549 cell
apoptosis by targeting ZEB1 protein. miR-144 regulated the expression of ZEB1 by 
interacting with its 3'-UTR region.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of miR-144 is reduced in malignant SPN tissues and
peripheral blood, being of clinical value in the diagnosis of malignant SPN.
miR-144 promotes the apoptosis of lung cancer cells, and inhibits the
proliferation, invasion and migration of lung cancer by regulating ZEB1 gene.

PMCID: PMC4503199
PMID: 26191328  [PubMed - in process]


155. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):4481-91. eCollection 2015.

Up-regulation of microRNA-302a inhibited the proliferation and invasion of
colorectal cancer cells by regulation of the MAPK and PI3K/Akt signaling
pathways.

Wei ZJ(1), Tao ML(2), Zhang W(1), Han GD(1), Zhu ZC(3), Miao ZG(4), Li JY(5),
Qiao ZB(6).

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Tumor Surgery, Cangzhou Central Hospital Cangzhou
061001, Hebei Province, People's Republic of China. (2)Liver Disease Digestive
Center, Beijing Youan Hospital Capital Medical University Beijing 100069,
People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Radiotherapy, Cangzhou Central
Hospital Cangzhou 061001, Hebei Province, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Cangzhou Central Hospital Cangzhou 061001, Hebei
Province, People's Republic of China. (5)Department of General Surgery, Cangzhou 
Central Hospital Cangzhou 061001, Hebei Province, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Oncology, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine East Hospital
Beijing 100078, People's Republic of China.

Aberrant expression of microRNA-302a (miR-302a) has been frequently reported in
some cancers excluding colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the role of miR-302a in 
CRC has not been reported. In this paper, we examined the effect of miR-302a
overexpression on proliferation and invasion in CRC cells. The mRNA level of
miR-302a in CRC cell lines was determined by real-time PCR. The miR-302a mimic
was transiently transfected into CRC cells using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent.
Subsequently, cell proliferation and invasion were assessed by MTT and Transwell 
assays. Western blot and ELISA assay were used to detect the expressions and
secretions of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Moreover, the expressions of
epithelial marker, mesenchymal markers and transcription factors were also
determined by Western blot. In addition, the effects of miR-302a overexpression
on the MAPK and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways were investigated by Western blot.
Our results showed that the mRNA level of miR-302a was remarkably decreased in
CRC cell lines compared with normal colon epithelium cells. Up-regulation of
miR-302a inhibited the proliferation and invasion of CRC cells. The expressions
and secretions of MMP-9 and -2 were evidently reduced by increasing miR-302a.
Besides, we found a decrease of ß-catenin, fibronection, vimentin, Snail, Slug,
ZEB1 and ZEB2 expressions and an increase of E-cadherin expression. We also found
that miR-302a overexpression might decrease the phosphorylation of Erk1/2 and
Akt. Altogether, our results indicated that miR-302a overexpression was shown to 
inhibit proliferation and invasion of CRC cells by reducing the expressions of
related proteins through suppressing the MAPK and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4503010
PMID: 26191138  [PubMed - in process]


156. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 18;16:529. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1707-x.

Analysis of the TGFß-induced program in primary airway epithelial cells shows
essential role of NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA signaling network in type II epithelial mesenchymal 
transition.

Tian B(1,)(2), Li X(3,)(4), Kalita M(5), Widen SG(6), Yang J(7), Bhavnani
SK(8,)(9,)(10), Dang B(11), Kudlicki A(12,)(13,)(14), Sinha M(15,)(16,)(17), Kong
F(18,)(19,)(20), Wood TG(21,)(22,)(23), Luxon BA(24,)(25,)(26,)(27), Brasier
AR(28,)(29,)(30).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB),
Galveston, TX, USA. bitian@utmb.edu. (2)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine,
UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. bitian@utmb.edu. (3)Institute for Translational
Sciences, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. xuli@utmb.edu. (4)Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. xuli@utmb.edu. (5)Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, TX, USA.
mrkalita@utmb.edu. (6)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX,
USA. sgwiden@utmb.edu. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, TX, USA. junyang@utmb.edu. (8)Department of
Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, TX, USA.
subhavna@utmb.edu. (9)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX,
USA. subhavna@utmb.edu. (10)Institute for Translational Sciences, UTMB,
Galveston, TX, USA. subhavna@utmb.edu. (11)Institute for Translational Sciences, 
UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. brdang@utmb.edu. (12)Sealy Center for Molecular
Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. askudlic@utmb.edu. (13)Institute for
Translational Sciences, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. askudlic@utmb.edu.
(14)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA.
askudlic@utmb.edu. (15)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX, 
USA. masinha@utmb.edu. (16)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. masinha@utmb.edu. (17)Bioinformatics Program, UTMB,
Galveston, TX, USA. masinha@utmb.edu. (18)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine,
UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. fakong@utmb.edu. (19)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. fakong@utmb.edu. (20)Bioinformatics 
Program, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. fakong@utmb.edu. (21)Sealy Center for
Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. tgwood@utmb.edu. (22)Institute for 
Translational Sciences, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. tgwood@utmb.edu. (23)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. tgwood@utmb.edu.
(24)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA.
baluxon@utmb.edu. (25)Institute for Translational Sciences, UTMB, Galveston, TX, 
USA. baluxon@utmb.edu. (26)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. baluxon@utmb.edu. (27)Bioinformatics Program, UTMB,
Galveston, TX, USA. baluxon@utmb.edu. (28)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, TX, USA. arbrasie@utmb.edu.
(29)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA.
arbrasie@utmb.edu. (30)Institute for Translational Sciences, UTMB, Galveston, TX,
USA. arbrasie@utmb.edu.

BACKGROUND: The airway epithelial cell plays a central role in coordinating the
pulmonary response to injury and inflammation. Here, transforming growth factor-ß
(TGFß) activates gene expression programs to induce stem cell-like properties,
inhibit expression of differentiated epithelial adhesion proteins and express
mesenchymal contractile proteins. This process is known as epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT); although much is known about the role of EMT in cellular
metastasis in an oncogene-transformed cell, less is known about Type II EMT, that
occurring in normal epithelial cells. In this study, we applied next generation
sequencing (RNA-Seq) in primary human airway epithelial cells to understand the
gene program controlling Type II EMT and how cytokine-induced inflammation
modifies it.
RESULTS: Generalized linear modeling was performed on a two-factor RNA-Seq
experiment of 6 treatments of telomerase immortalized human small airway
epithelial cells (3 replicates). Using a stringent cut-off, we identified 3,478
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in response to EMT. Unbiased transcription 
factor enrichment analysis identified three clusters of EMT regulators, one
including SMADs/TP63 and another NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA. Surprisingly, we also observed 527
of the EMT DEGs were also regulated by the TNF-NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA pathway. This Type II
EMT program was compared to Type III EMT in TGFß stimulated A549 alveolar lung
cancer cells, revealing significant functional differences. Moreover, we observe 
that Type II EMT modifies the outcome of the TNF program, reducing IFN signaling 
and enhancing integrin signaling. We confirmed experimentally that TGFß-induced
the NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA pathway by observing a 2-fold change in NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA nuclear
translocation. A small molecule IKK inhibitor blocked TGFß-induced core
transcription factor (SNAIL1, ZEB1 and Twist1) and mesenchymal gene (FN1 and VIM)
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA controls a SMAD-independent gene
network whose regulation is required for initiation of Type II EMT. Type II EMT
dramatically affects the induction and kinetics of TNF-dependent gene networks.

PMCID: PMC4506436
PMID: 26187636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jul 16;6:e1823. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.192.

miR-205-5p-mediated downregulation of ErbB/HER receptors in breast cancer stem
cells results in targeted therapy resistance.

De Cola A(1), Volpe S(2), Budani MC(1), Ferracin M(3), Lattanzio R(1), Turdo
A(2), D'Agostino D(1), Capone E(1), Stassi G(2), Todaro M(2), Di Ilio C(1), Sala 
G(4), Piantelli M(1), Negrini M(3), Veronese A(1), De Laurenzi V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Sciences, Aging Research Center
(Ce.S.I.), University G. D'Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara, Italy. (2)Department of
Surgical and Oncological Sciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine and Laboratory for
Technologies of Advanced Therapies (LTTA), University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(4)1] Department of Experimental and Clinical Sciences, Aging Research Center
(Ce.S.I.), University G. D'Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara, Italy [2] Mediapharma
s.r.l., Via dei Vestini, Chieti, Italy.

The ErbB tyrosine kinase receptor family has been shown to have an important role
in tumorigenesis, and the expression of its receptor members is frequently
deregulated in many types of solid tumors. Various drugs targeting these
receptors have been approved for cancer treatment. Particularly, in breast
cancer, anti-Her2/EGFR molecules represent the standard therapy for Her2-positive
malignancies. However, in a number of cases, the tumor relapses or progresses
thus suggesting that not all cancer cells have been targeted. One possibility is 
that a subset of cells capable of regenerating the tumor, such as cancer stem
cells (CSCs), may not respond to these therapeutic agents. Accumulating evidences
indicate that miR-205-5p is significantly downregulated in breast tumors compared
with normal breast tissue and acts as a tumor suppressor directly targeting
oncogenes such as Zeb1 and ErbB3. In this study, we report that miR-205-5p is
highly expressed in BCSCs and represses directly ERBB2 and indirectly EGFR
leading to resistance to targeted therapy. Furthermore, we show that miR-205-5p
directly regulates the expression of p63 which is in turn involved in the EGFR
expression suggesting a miR-205/p63/EGFR regulation.

PMCID: PMC4650737
PMID: 26181203  [PubMed - in process]


158. Hum Pathol. 2015 Sep;46(9):1267-74. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.05.010. Epub 2015
May 30.

Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related markers in
triple-negative breast cancer: ZEB1 as a potential biomarker for poor clinical
outcome.

Jang MH(1), Kim HJ(2), Kim EJ(2), Chung YR(3), Park SY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam 
463-707, Republic of Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam 463-707, Republic
of Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, Seoul
National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam 463-707, Republic of Korea;
Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul
110-799, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: sypmd@snu.ac.kr.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous group of disease with a
well-known association with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and breast
cancer stem cell phenotype. Recent studies have shown that TNBC can be classified
into 6 subtypes, including basal-like, mesenchymal-like, and mesenchymal
stem-like subtypes. However, clinical significance of the EMT in TNBC remains
unclear. We analyzed immunohistochemical expression of EMT-related markers,
including EMT markers (expression of vimentin, smooth muscle actin, osteonectin, 
and N-cadherin; loss of E-cadherin), EMT inducers (ZEB1 and CD146), and breast
cancer stem cell markers (CD44(+)/CD24(-) and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1) in 173
TNBCs and correlated their expression with clinicopathological features of the
tumors, including clinical outcome. Expressions of vimentin, CD44(+)/CD24(-), and
CD146 were more frequent in basal-like TNBCs than non-basal-like TNBCs. Whereas
CD146 expression was closely associated with the expression of various EMT
markers and CD44(+)/CD24(-) phenotype, ZEB1 expression correlated only with the
expression of smooth muscle actin. Expressions of vimentin, smooth muscle actin, 
osteonectin, and ZEB1 and loss of E-cadherin were more frequently found in
metaplastic carcinomas than in other histologic subtypes. In survival analyses,
EMT markers were not associated with patients' clinical outcomes. However, ZEB1
expression was found to be an independent prognostic factor for poor disease-free
survival. These findings indicate that expression of EMT-related markers in TNBCs
can be a signature of a certain subgroup of TNBC, which is associated with
metaplastic carcinoma, and ZEB1 expression can serve as a potential biomarker to 
define a subgroup of TNBC associated with poor clinical outcomes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26170011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Nov;68(11):905-12. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-202868. Epub
2015 Jul 10.

Twist predicts poor outcome of patients with astrocytic glioma.

Nordfors K(1), Haapasalo J(2), Mäkelä K(3), Granberg KJ(4), Nykter M(5), Korja
M(6), Paavonen T(7), Haapasalo H(7), Soini Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland Fimlab
Laboratories Ltd, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. (2)Fimlab
Laboratories Ltd, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland Unit of
Neurosurgery, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. (3)Fimlab
Laboratories Ltd, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. (4)Institute of 
Biosciences and Medical Technology (BioMediTech), University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland Department of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology,
Tampere, Finland. (5)Institute of Biosciences and Medical Technology
(BioMediTech), University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland Australian 
School of Advanced Medicine, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia. (7)Fimlab Laboratories Ltd, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere,
Finland Department of Pathology, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(8)Department of Pathology/Forensic Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine,
University of Eastern Finland, Cancer Center of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS AND METHODS: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has previously been
linked to glioma invasion and progression. To determine whether EMT regulators,
Twist and Zeb1, had clinical significance in astrocytic gliomas, the association 
of Twist and Zeb1 with clinicopathological and molecular factors was studied in
269 astrocytoma samples.
RESULTS: Twist and Zeb1 were widely expressed in astrocytic gliomas, but the
expression of the former did not correlate with that of the latter. Stronger
Twist expression levels were associated with higher WHO grades (p=0.001), whereas
Zeb1 did not correlate with WHO grades. We found no association between Twist and
proliferation activity (Ki67/MIB-1), p53 status, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) amplification or neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) expression. There
was no significant difference in Twist or Zeb1 expression when primary and
secondary gliomas were analysed. Tumours with high Twist expression were IDH1
negative (p=0.009). High hypoxia-inducible factor-1a expression correlated
significantly with positive Twist expression (p<0.001), whereas it was not
associated with Zeb1 expression. Zeb1 expression did not correlate with
proliferation, EGFR or IDH1. Nevertheless, we did find a correlation between high
Zeb1 expression and low p53 expression levels (p=0.027). Positive NCAM expression
was significantly associated with Zeb1 positivity (p=0.022). Zeb1 had no
association with patient survival, whereas positive Twist expression predicted
poor survival for patients in both univariate (p<0.001) and multivariable
analyses (p=0.027).
CONCLUSIONS: EMT regulators, Twist and Zeb1, are common features of infiltrating 
astrocytomas, and Twist is upregulated in glioblastomas in particular. Twist may 
be a novel marker for poor prognosis in glioma patients.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26163539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(4):1440-52.

The Interaction Between MiR-141 and lncRNA-H19 in Regulating Cell Proliferation
and Migration in Gastric Cancer.

Zhou X, Ye F, Yin C, Zhuang Y, Yue G, Zhang G.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Non-coding RNAs including miRNA and lncRNA had been reported to 
regulate gene expression and were both related to cancer progression.
MicroRNA-141 (miR-141) has been reported to play a role in the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and H19 has also been demonstrated to
promote malignancy in various cancers. We aimed to determine the correlation
between miR-141 and H19 and their roles in gastric cancer in this study.
METHODS: H19 and miR-141 expression were detected by qRT-PCR. By bioinformatic
analysis and luciferase assay we examined the correlation between H19 and miR-141
in vitro.
RESULTS: H19 expression was found to be inversely correlated to miR-141
expression in gastric cancer cells and tissues. H19 promotes malignancy including
proliferation and invasion whereas miR-141 suppresses malignancy in human cancer 
cells. MiR-141 binds to H19 in a sequence specific manner, and suppresses H19
expression and functions including proliferation and invasion. MiR-141 could also
regulate H19 target genes and miR-141 inhibitor restores H19 siRNA function,
while H19 regulates miR-141 target gene ZEB1.
CONCLUSION: These results were the first to demonstrate that H19 and miR-141
could compete with each other and affect their target genes in gastric cancer,
which provide important clues for understanding the key roles of lncRNA-miRNA
functional network in cancer.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26160158  [PubMed - in process]


161. Oncol Rep. 2015 Sep;34(3):1469-77. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4109. Epub 2015 Jul 3.

Umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells promote proliferation and migration
in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells through activation of the ERK
pathway.

Li T(1), Zhang C(2), Ding Y(1), Zhai W(1), Liu K(1), Bu F(1), Tu T(1), Sun L(1), 
Zhu W(1), Zhou F(1), Qi W(1), Hu J(1), Chen H(1), Sun X(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Clinical
Laboratory Medicine, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China. (2)The Second
People's Hospital of Kunshan, Kunshan, Jiangsu 215300, P.R. China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are known to migrate to tumor tissues and to play
an important role in cancer progression. However, the effects of MSCs on tumor
progression remain controversial. The purpose of the present study was to detect 
the effects of human umbilical cord-derived MSCs (hUC-MSCs) on the human breast
cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 in vitro and the underlying mechanisms.
MSCs were isolated and identified from umbilical cord tissues. MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7 cells were treated with conditioned medium (CM) from 10 and 20% umbilical
cord MSCs (UC-MSCs), and the resulting changes in proliferation and migration
were investigated. The
3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2-H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) and plate
clone formation assays were used to assess the effect on proliferation, and the
effects of CM on MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 migration were assessed through scratch
wound and Transwell migration assays. The expression of cell proliferation- and
metastasis-related genes and proteins and activation of the ERK signaling pathway
were analyzed by RT-PCR and western blot assays. UC-MSCs are characteristically
similar to bone marrow MSCs (BM-MSCs) and exhibit multipotential differentiation 
capability (i.e., osteoblasts and adipocytes). The MTT, plate clone formation,
scratch wound and Transwell migration assay results revealed that 10 and 20% CM
promoted the proliferation and migration to higher levels than those observed in 
the control group. Our findings showed that UC-MSC-CM inhibited E-cadherin
expression, increased the expression of N-cadherin and proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) and enhanced the expression of ZEB1, a transcription factor
involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), through activation of the
ERK pathway. U0126, an inhibitor of ERK, reversed the effects of UC-MSC-CM on
breast cancer cell proliferation and migration. We conclude that UC-MSCs promote 
the proliferation and migration of breast cancer cell lines via activation of the
ERK pathway.

PMID: 26151310  [PubMed - in process]


162. J Pathol. 2015 Dec;237(4):411-22. doi: 10.1002/path.4582. Epub 2015 Aug 18.

Down-regulation of prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA) by Slug promotes metastasis 
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Wang L(1), Sang Y(1,)(2), Tang J(1), Zhang RH(1), Luo D(1), Chen M(1), Deng
WG(1), Kang T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou,
510060, China. (2)Nanchang Key Laboratory of Cancer Pathogenesis and
Translational Research, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang University,
Nanchang, China.

Distant metastasis and local recurrence are still the major causes for failure of
treatment in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), making it urgent to
further elicit the molecular mechanisms of NPC metastasis. Using a gene
microarray including transcription factors and known markers for cancer stem
cells, prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA) was found to be significantly
down-regulated in metastatic NPC in lymph node, compared to its primary tumour,
and in NPC cell lines with high metastatic ability compared to those with low
metastatic ability. NPC patients with low PSCA expression had a consistently poor
metastasis-free survival (p = 0.003). Knockdown and overexpression of PSCA
respectively enhanced and impaired the migration and invasion in vitro and the
lung metastasis in vivo of NPC cells. Mechanistically, the enhancement of NPC
metastasis by knocking down PSCA probably involved epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), by up-regulating N-cadherin and ZEB1/2 and by activating RhoA. 
The down-regulation of PSCA in NPC cells resulted directly from the binding of
Slug to the PSCA promoter. PSCA may be a potential diagnostic marker and
therapeutic target for patients with NPC. Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society
of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26147638  [PubMed - in process]


163. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 7;6(22):18966-79.

Role and prognostic significance of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition factor 
ZEB2 in ovarian cancer.

Prislei S(1), Martinelli E(1), Zannoni GF(1,)(2), Petrillo M(1), Filippetti F(1),
Mariani M(3), Mozzetti S(1), Raspaglio G(1), Scambia G(1), Ferlini C(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Pathology, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy. (3)Reproductive Tumor Biology Research, Biomedical Lab,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Danbury Hospital, Danbury, CT, USA.

ZEB2 is a key factor in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a program
controlling cell migration in embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis.
We demonstrated a role of ZEB2 in migration and anchorage-independent cell growth
in ovarian cancer, as shown by ZEB2 silencing. We found that the RNA-binding
protein HuR bound the 3'UTR of ZEB2 mRNA, acting as a positive regulator of ZEB2 
protein expression. In Hey ovarian cell line, HuR silencing decreased ZEB2 and
ZEB1 nuclear expression and impaired migration. In hypoglycemic conditions ZEB2
expression decreased, along with ZEB1, vimentin and cytoplasmic HuR, and a
reduced cellular migration ability was observed. Analysis of ZEB2 and HuR
expression in ovarian cancers revealed that nuclear ZEB2 is localized in tumor
leading edge and co-localizes with cytoplasmic HuR. In a series of 143 ovarian
cancer patients high expression of ZEB2 mRNA significantly correlated with a poor
prognosis in term of both overall survival and progression- free survival.
Moreover, at immunohistochemical evaluation, we found that prognostic
significance of ZEB2 protein relies on its nuclear expression and co-localization
with cytoplasmic HuR. In conclusion our findings indicated that nuclear ZEB2 may 
enhance progression of EMT transition and acquisition of an aggressive phenotype 
in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4662468
PMID: 26136338  [PubMed - in process]


164. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 29;10(6):e0124638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124638.
eCollection 2015.

Proteomics and Transcriptomics of BJAB Cells Expressing the Epstein-Barr Virus
Noncoding RNAs EBER1 and EBER2.

Pimienta G(1), Fok V(1), Haslip M(2), Nagy M(3), Takyar S(2), Steitz JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United
States of America. (2)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, United States of America. (3)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut,
United States of America.

In Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent infection, the EBV-encoded RNAs EBER1 and
EBER2 accumulate in the host cell nucleus to ~10(6) copies. While the expression 
of EBERs in cell lines is associated with transformation, a mechanistic
explanation of their roles in EBV latency remains elusive. To identify
EBER-specific gene expression features, we compared the proteome and mRNA
transcriptome from BJAB cells (an EBV-negative B lymphoma cell line) stably
transfected with an empty plasmid or with one carrying both EBER genes. We
identified ~1800 proteins with at least 2 SILAC pair measurements, of which only 
8 and 12 were up- and downregulated = 2-fold, respectively. One upregulated
protein was PIK3AP1, a B-cell specific protein adapter known to activate the
PI3K-AKT signaling pathway, which regulates alternative splicing and translation 
in addition to its pro-survival effects. In the mRNA-seq data, the mRNA levels
for some of the proteins changing in the SILAC data did not change. We instead
observed isoform switch events. We validated the most relevant findings with
biochemical assays. These corroborated the upregulation of PIK3AP1 and AKT
activation in BJAB cells expressing high levels of both EBERs and EBNA1 (a
surrogate of Burkitt's lymphoma EBV latency I) relative to those expressing only 
EBNA1. The mRNA-seq data in these cells showed multiple upregulated oncogenes
whose mRNAs are enriched for 3´-UTR AU-rich elements (AREs), such as ccl3, ccr7, 
il10, vegfa and zeb1. The CCL3, CCR7, IL10 and VEGFA proteins promote cell
proliferation and are associated with EBV-mediated lymphomas. In EBV latency,
ZEB1 represses the transcription of ZEBRA, an EBV lytic phase activation factor. 
We previously found that EBER1 interacts with AUF1 in vivo and proposed
stabilization of ARE-containing mRNAs. Thus, the ~10(6) copies of EBER1 may
promote not only cell proliferation due to an increase in the levels of
ARE-containing genes like ccl3, ccr7, il10, and vegfa, but also the maintenance
of latency, through higher levels of zeb1.

PMCID: PMC4487896
PMID: 26121143  [PubMed - in process]


165. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 21;6(24):20604-20.

The LPA1/ZEB1/miR-21-activation pathway regulates metastasis in basal breast
cancer.

Sahay D(1), Leblanc R(1), Grunewald TG(2), Ambatipudi S(3), Ribeiro J(1),
Clézardin P(1), Peyruchaud O(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR1033, UCB Lyon 1, Faculté de Médecine Lyon Est, Lyon, France.
(2)Laboratory for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology, LMU Munich, 
Munich, Germany. (3)Epigenetics Group, International Agency for Research on
Cancer, Lyon, France.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a bioactive lipid promoting cancer metastasis. LPA
activates a series of six G protein-coupled receptors (LPA1-6). While blockage of
LPA1in vivo inhibits breast carcinoma metastasis, down-stream genes mediating
LPA-induced metastasis have not been yet identified. Herein we showed by
analyzing publicly available expression data from 1488 human primary breast
tumors that the gene encoding the transcription factor ZEB1 was the most
correlated with LPAR1 encoding LPA1. This correlation was most prominent in basal
primary breast carcinomas and restricted to cell lines of basal subtypes.
Functional experiments in three different basal cell lines revealed that
LPA-induced ZEB1 expression was regulated by the
LPA1/Phosphatidylinositol-3-Kinase (Pi3K) axis. DNA microarray and real-time PCR 
analyses further demonstrated that LPA up-regulated the oncomiR miR-21 through an
LPA1/Pi3K/ZEB1-dependent mechanism. Strikingly, treatment with a mirVana miR-21
inhibitor, or silencing LPA1 or ZEB1 completely blocked LPA-induced cell
migration in vitro, invasion and tumor cell bone colonization in vivo, which can 
be restored with a mirVana miR-21 mimic. Finally, high LPAR1 expression in basal 
breast tumors predicted worse lung-metastasis-free survival. Collectively, our
results elucidate a new molecular pathway driving LPA-induced metastasis, thus
underscoring the therapeutic potential of targeting LPA1 in patients with basal
breast carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4653029
PMID: 26098771  [PubMed - in process]


166. Springerplus. 2015 Jun 6;4:245. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1022-7. eCollection 2015.

Estrogen and tamoxifen up-regulate FXYD3 on breast cancer cells: assessing the
differential roles of ER a and ZEB1.

Herrmann P(1), Aronica SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Canisius College, 2001 Main Street, Buffalo, NY 14208
USA.

Increased expression of the FXYD3 family of proteins has been associated with
lung, colorectal, bladder and pancreatic cancers, and recent evidence suggests
that elevated FXYD3 may promote tumor cell proliferation in breast cancer as
well. However, factors involved in up-regulating the expression of FXYD3 in
breast cancer have not been identified. We evaluated whether estrogen and the
selective estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen could regulate the expression of 
FXYD3 on breast cancer cells. Estrogen receptor (ER) a-positive MCF-7 and ER
a-negative MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells used in our studies were treated 
with estrogen, tamoxifen or the combination of these agents. Relative expression 
of FXYD3 was assessed using fluorochrome-tagged antibodies and a fluorescence
cytometer. We found that estrogen and tamoxifen, used alone or in combination,
significantly increased FXYD3 on MCF-7 cells. FXYD3 levels did not increase
compared to the control samples when ER a-negative 231 cells were treated with
estrogen or tamoxifen, alone or in combination, indicating that ER a was required
for the increased FXYD3 response. We showed that ER a associates with the
transcription factor ZEB1 in MCF-7 cells, and that decreasing ZEB1 protein
expression using siRNA disrupts the ability of estrogen, but not tamoxifen, to
increase FXYD3 in MCF-7 cells. Our results indicate that there may be two
mechanisms, both involving ER a and one requiring ZEB1, through which FXYD3 may
be increased by estrogen and tamoxifen in breast cancer cells. Ongoing research
endeavors are focusing on identifying cellular components through which estrogen 
and tamoxifen, alone or in combination, differentially regulate FXYD3 expression 
in human breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4467593
PMID: 26090296  [PubMed]


167. Minerva Med. 2015 Aug;106(4):193-202. Epub 2015 Jun 17.

MicroRNA-200c overexpression plays an inhibitory role in human pancreatic cancer 
stem cells by regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Ma C(1), Ding YC, Yu W, Wang Q, Meng B, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China - hbht68@163.com.

AIM: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are believed to be the 'seed cell' in cancer
recurrence and metastasis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as potential
therapeutic candidates due to their ability to regulate the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The goal of this study was to
investigate the effect of miRNA-200c (miR-200c) on the EMT, tumorigenesis, colony
formation, invasion and chemoresistance of human pancreatic cancer stem cells
(PCSCs).
METHODS: PCSCs with CD24+CD44+ESA+ as the marker was sorted from PANC-1 cell line
by fluorescence activated cell sorter (FACS). Quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) assay was used to detect the relative mRNA expression levels of
miR-200c and EMT-associated phenotypes. Transfection of miR-200c mimic into PCSCs
was performed to establish miR- 200c overexpressed cells. The assays of colony
forming, cellular invasion and survival in vitro and tumor progression in vivo
were performed.
RESULTS: Expression of miR-200c was significantly reduced in PCSCs compared with 
PANC-1 cells. However, the stable over expression of the miR-200c in the PCSCs
resulted in a significant down-regulation of zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1
(ZEB1) and the Vimentin expression, an upregulation of the E-cadherin expression 
as well as a decrease of colony forming, chemoresistance and invasion in vitro
and xenograft growth in vivo in nude mice by inhibition of the EMT.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that miR-200c may become a new therapeutic
target for gene therapy in patients suffered from pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 26081037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Chin Med Assoc. 2015 Aug;78(8):438-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2015.05.002. Epub
2015 Jun 13.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related factors in solid tumor and
hematological malignancy.

Chou YS(1), Yang MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University School of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Lo-Hsu Foundation, Lotung Poh-Ai
Hospital, Luodong, Yilan, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Institute of Clinical Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division
of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: mhyang2@vghtpe.gov.tw.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process plays pivotal roles in
regulatory mechanisms of embryogenesis and wound healing physiologically, and
organ fibrosis, cancer progression, and metastasis pathologically. EMT is
classified as primary, secondary, and tertiary during embryonic development. EMT 
contributes to repair of tissue injury and fibrogenesis by re-epithelialization
and regeneration of fibroblasts, respectively. The hallmarks of EMT include loss 
of contact inhibition, remodeling of extracellular matrix, and reorganization of 
cytoskeleton, along with expression of mesenchymal markers and reduction of
epithelial markers. Cancer cells acquire stemness, migration and invasive
capability, evade apoptosis, and initiate metastasis to distant organs. Several
EMT regulators including Snail, Zeb1, Zeb2, and Twist in solid tumor and Sox4,
distal-less homeobox gene 4 (DLX4), Prdm14, Bmi1, and the forkhead box family in 
hematological malignancy are reviewed with regard to their signaling pathways,
regulatory mechanisms, and clinical interactions.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Taiwan.

PMID: 26078096  [PubMed - in process]


169. Int J Cancer. 2015 Dec 1;137(11):2566-77. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29642. Epub 2015 Jun
30.

A self-enforcing CD44s/ZEB1 feedback loop maintains EMT and stemness properties
in cancer cells.

Preca BT(1,)(2), Bajdak K(1,)(2), Mock K(1,)(2), Sundararajan V(1,)(2,)(3),
Pfannstiel J(1), Maurer J(1,)(4,)(5), Wellner U(6), Hopt UT(1), Brummer
T(7,)(8,)(9), Brabletz S(1,)(10), Brabletz T(10), Stemmler MP(1,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, D-79106,
Freiburg, Germany. (2)Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany. (3)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM),
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Germany. (4)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
Heidelberg, Germany. (5)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. (6)Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, 
Campus Lübeck, Germany. (7)Institute for Molecular Medicine and Cell Research,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Germany. (8)BIOSS Centre for Biological
Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Germany. (9)Comprehensive
Cancer Center Freiburg, University Medical Center Freiburg, Germany.
(10)Department of Experimental Medicine I, Nikolaus-Fiebiger Center for Molecular
Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, D-91054, Erlangen,
Germany.

Invasion and metastasis of carcinomas are often activated by induction of
aberrant epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This is mainly driven by the
transcription factor ZEB1, promoting tumor-initiating capacity correlated with
increased expression of the putative stem cell marker CD44. However, the direct
link between ZEB1, CD44 and tumourigenesis is still enigmatic. Remarkably,
EMT-induced repression of ESRP1 controls alternative splicing of CD44, causing a 
shift in the expression from the variant CD44v to the standard CD44s isoform. We 
analyzed whether CD44 and ZEB1 regulate each other and show that ZEB1 controls
CD44s splicing by repression of ESRP1 in breast and pancreatic cancer.
Intriguingly, CD44s itself activates the expression of ZEB1, resulting in a
self-sustaining ZEB1 and CD44s expression. Activation of this novel CD44s-ZEB1
regulatory loop has functional impact on tumor cells, as evident by increased
tumor-sphere initiation capacity, drug-resistance and tumor recurrence. In
summary, we identified a self-enforcing feedback loop that employs CD44s to
activate ZEB1 expression. This renders tumor cell stemness independent of
external stimuli, as ZEB1 downregulates ESRP1, further promoting CD44s isoform
synthesis.

© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 26077342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 24;35(12):1575-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.223. Epub 2015 Jun
15.

Upregulation of long noncoding RNA ZEB1-AS1 promotes tumor metastasis and
predicts poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li T(1), Xie J(1), Shen C(1), Cheng D(1), Shi Y(1), Wu Z(1), Deng X(1), Chen
H(1), Shen B(1), Peng C(1), Li H(1), Zhan Q(1), Zhu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepato-Bilio-Pancreatic Surgery, Shanghai Institute of Digestive
Surgery, Rui Jin Hospital affiliated with Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related
mortality worldwide. Despite progress in diagnostics and treatment of HCC, its
prognosis remains poor. Emerging studies showed that long noncoding RNAs
(lncRNAs) have crucial regulatory roles in cancer biology. In the current study, 
differentially expressed lncRNAs between HCC and paired non-tumor tissues were
identified using microarrays. The effects of a specific differentially expressed 
lncRNA (termed ZEB1-AS1) on tumor progression were investigated in vitro and in
vivo. We found that ZEB1-AS1 is frequently upregulated in HCC samples, especially
in metastatic tumor tissues. DNA methylation analysis shows a tumor-specific
ZEB1-AS1 promoter hypomethylation. Aberrant methylation is tightly correlated
with overexpression of ZEB1-AS1 in HCC. Patients with ZEB1-AS1 hypomethylation or
with high ZEB1-AS1 expression have poor recurrence-free survival. Functionally,
ZEB1-AS1 promotes tumor growth and metastasis, acts as an oncogene in HCC. The
ZEB1-AS1 gene is located in physical contiguity with ZEB1 and positively
regulates the ZEB1 expression. ZEB1 inhibition partially abrogates
ZEB1-AS1-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer
metastasis. Our results provide novel insights into the function of lncRNA-driven
hepatocarcinogenesis, highlight the important role of ZEB1-AS1 and ZEB1 in HCC
progression, and indicate that ZEB1-AS1 may be served as a valuable prognostic
biomarker for HCC.

PMID: 26073087  [PubMed - in process]


171. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Oct;1853(10 Pt A):2296-305. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.05.035. Epub 2015 Jun 10.

TRIM29 regulates the p63-mediated pathway in cervical cancer cells.

Masuda Y(1), Takahashi H(1), Hatakeyama S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Kita 15, Nishi 7, 
Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. Electronic address:
hatas@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

Cell invasion and adhesion play an important role in cancer metastasis and are
orchestrated by a complicated network of transcription factors including p63.
Here, we show that a member of the tripartite motif protein family, TRIM29, is
required for regulation of the p63-mediated pathway in cervical cancer cells.
TRIM29 knockdown alters the adhesion and invasion activities of cervical cancer
cells. TRIM29 knockdown and overexpression cause a significant decrease and
increase of TAp63a expression, respectively. TRIM29 knockdown alters the
expression pattern of integrins and increases ZEB1 expression. TRIM29 is required
for suppression of an increase in the adhesion activity of cells by TAp63a. These
findings suggest that TRIM29 regulates the p63-mediated pathway and the behavior 
of cervical cancer cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26071105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 1;75(15):3181-91. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3721. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

Amplification of Long Noncoding RNA ZFAS1 Promotes Metastasis in Hepatocellular
Carcinoma.

Li T(1), Xie J(1), Shen C(1), Cheng D(1), Shi Y(1), Wu Z(1), Deng X(1), Chen
H(1), Shen B(1), Peng C(1), Li H(1), Zhan Q(1), Zhu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepato-Bilio-Pancreatic Surgery, Shanghai Institute of Digestive
Surgery, Rui Jin Hospital affiliated with Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Hepato-Bilio-Pancreatic Surgery, Shanghai Institute of
Digestive Surgery, Rui Jin Hospital affiliated with Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, China. zhuzhecheng@126.com.

Despite progress in the diagnostics and treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), its prognosis remains poor. In this study, we globally assessed long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) for contributions to HCC using publicly available
microarray data, in vitro and in vivo assays. Here, we report that ZFAS1,
encoding a lncRNA that is frequently amplified in HCC, is associated with
intrahepatic and extrahepatic metastasis and poor prognosis of HCC. ZFAS1
functions as an oncogene in HCC progression by binding miR-150 and abrogating its
tumor-suppressive function in this setting. miR-150 repressed HCC cell invasion
by inhibiting ZEB1 and the matrix metalloproteinases MMP14 and MMP16. Conversely,
ZFAS1 activated ZEB1, MMP14, and MMP16 expression, inhibiting these effects of
miR-150. Our results establish a function for ZFAS1 in metastatic progression and
suggest its candidacy as a new prognostic biomarker and target for clinical
management of HCC.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26069248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):22513-25.

The lncRNA H19 promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition by functioning as
miRNA sponges in colorectal cancer.

Liang WC(1,)(2), Fu WM(3), Wong CW(1,)(2), Wang Y(1), Wang WM(1), Hu GX(4), Zhang
L(1), Xiao LJ(5), Wan DC(1), Zhang JF(1,)(6), Waye MM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong, P.R. China. (2)Croucher Laboratory for Human
Genomics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong
Kong, P.R. China. (3)Guangzhou Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Guangzhou, P.R. China. (4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Peking 
University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, P.R. China. (5)Department of Clinical
Laboratory, Nanshan Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Shenzhen,
P.R. China. (6)Department of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, P.R. China.

Recently, the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) H19 has been identified as an
oncogenic gene in multiple cancer types and elevated expression of H19 was
tightly linked to tumorigenesis and cancer progression. However, the molecular
basis for this observation has not been characterized in colorectal cancer (CRC) 
especially during epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) progression. In our 
studies, H19 was characterized as a novel regulator of EMT in CRC. We found that 
H19 was highly expressed in mesenchymal-like cancer cells and primary CRC
tissues. Stable expression of H19 significantly promotes EMT progression and
accelerates in vivo and in vitro tumor growth. Furthermore, by using
bioinformatics study and RNA immunoprecipitation combined with luciferase
reporter assays, we demonstrated that H19 functioned as a competing endogenous
RNA (ceRNA) for miR-138 and miR-200a, antagonized their functions and led to the 
de-repression of their endogenous targets Vimentin, ZEB1, and ZEB2, all of which 
were core marker genes for mesenchymal cells. Taken together, these observations 
imply that the lncRNA H19 modulated the expression of multiple genes involved in 
EMT by acting as a competing endogenous RNA, which may build up the missing link 
between the regulatory miRNA network and EMT progression.

PMCID: PMC4673179
PMID: 26068968  [PubMed - in process]


174. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16638-52.

Dual regulation by microRNA-200b-3p and microRNA-200b-5p in the inhibition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in triple-negative breast cancer.

Rhodes LV(1), Martin EC(2), Segar HC(2), Miller DF(3), Buechlein A(4), Rusch
DB(4), Nephew KP(3), Burow ME(2,)(5), Collins-Burow BM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers, 
FL, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA. (3)Medical Sciences and Department of
Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Bloomington, IN, USA. (4)Indiana University Center for Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Bloomington, IN, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Tulane
University, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) involves loss of an epithelial
phenotype and activation of a mesenchymal one. Enhanced expression of genes
associated with a mesenchymal transition includes ZEB1/2, TWIST, and FOXC1.
miRNAs are known regulators of gene expression and altered miRNA expression is
known to enhance EMT in breast cancer. Here we demonstrate that the tumor
suppressive miRNA family, miR-200, is not expressed in triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) cell lines and that miR-200b-3p over-expression represses EMT,
which is evident through decreased migration and increased CDH1 expression.
Despite the loss of migratory capacity following re-expression of miR-200b-3p, no
subsequent loss of the conventional miR-200 family targets and EMT markers ZEB1/2
was observed. Next generation RNA-sequencing analysis showed that enhanced
expression of pri-miR-200b lead to ectopic expression of both miR-200b-3p and
miR-200b-5p with multiple isomiRs expressed for each of these miRNAs.
Furthermore, miR-200b-5p was expressed in the receptor positive, epithelial
breast cancer cell lines but not in the TNBC (mesenchymal) cell lines. In
addition, a compensatory mechanism for miR-200b-3p/200b-5p targeting, where both 
miRNAs target the RHOGDI pathway leading to non-canonical repression of EMT, was 
demonstrated. Collectively, these data are the first to demonstrate dual
targeting by miR-200b-3p and miR-200b-5p and a previously undescribed role for
microRNA processing and strand expression in EMT and TNBC, the most aggressive
breast cancer subtype.

PMCID: PMC4599295
PMID: 26062653  [PubMed - in process]


175. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):22098-113.

Functional relevance of a six mesenchymal gene signature in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) reversal by the triple angiokinase
inhibitor, nintedanib (BIBF1120).

Huang RY(1,)(2), Kuay KT(2), Tan TZ(2), Asad M(1), Tang HM(2), Ng AH(3), Ye
J(2,)(3), Chung VY(2), Thiery JP(2,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National University Health System,
Singapore. (2)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. (3)Dean's Office, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. (4)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
A*STAR, Singapore. (5)Department of Biochemistry, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a crucial mechanism in carcinoma
progression, describes the process whereby epithelial cells lose their
apico-basal polarity and junctional complexes and acquire a mesenchymal-like
morphology. Several markers are considered to be authentic indicators of an
epithelial or mesenchymal status; however, there is currently no comprehensive or
systematic method with which to determine their functional relevance. Previously,
we identified a 33-gene EMT signature comprising 25 epithelial and 6 mesenchymal 
genes that best describe this concept of the EMT spectrum. Here, we designed
small-scale siRNA screens targeting these six mesenchymal signature genes
(CD99L2, EMP3, ITGA5, SYDE1, VIM, ZEB1) to explore their functional relevance and
their roles during EMT reversal by nintedanib (BIBF1120) in a mesenchymal-like
SKOV3 ovarian cancer cell line. We found that neither cell proliferation nor
cytotoxicity was affected by silencing any of these genes. SKOV3 cells expressing
siRNA against mesenchymal genes (ZEB1, EMP3, CD99L2, ITGA5, and SYDE1) showed
enhanced colony compaction (reduced inter-nuclear distance). Inductions of
E-cadherin expression were only observed in SYDE1- and ZEB1-silenced SKOV3 cells.
In addition, only SYDE1-silenced SKOV3 cells showed increased anoikis. Finally,
we identified that SYDE1 and ZEB1 were down-regulated in nintedanib-treated SKOV3
cells and SYDE1- and ZEB1-silenced SKOV3 cells showed enhanced nintedanib-induced
up-regulation of E-cadherin. Nintedanib-treated SKOV3 cells also showed colony
compaction and decreases in EMT scores both in vitro and in vivo. We conclude
that SYDE1 and ZEB1 are functionally relevant in EMT reversal. This study thus
provides a proof-of-concept for the use of in vitro siRNA screening to explore
the EMT-related functions of selected genes and their potential relevance in the 
discovery of EMT reversing drugs.

PMCID: PMC4673149
PMID: 26061747  [PubMed - in process]


176. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 9;10(6):e0129603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129603.
eCollection 2015.

HIF-1a Promotes Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition and Metastasis through Direct
Regulation of ZEB1 in Colorectal Cancer.

Zhang W(1), Shi X(2), Peng Y(2), Wu M(2), Zhang P(2), Xie R(2), Wu Y(2), Yan
Q(2), Liu S(2), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of
Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China; Department of Medical Oncology, The First people's Hospital of Yunnan
Province, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of
Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China.

It is well recognized that hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1a) is involved 
in cancer metastasis, chemotherapy and poor prognosis. We previously found that
deferoxamine, a hypoxia-mimetic agent, induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) in colorectal cancer. Therefore, here we explored a new molecular mechanism
for HIF-1a contributing to EMT and cancer metastasis through binding to ZEB1. In 
this study, we showed that overexpression of HIF-1a with adenovirus infection
promoted EMT, cell invasion and migration in vitro and in vivo. On a molecular
level, HIF-1a directly binding to the proximal promoter of ZEB1 via hypoxia
response element (HRE) sites thus increasing the transactivity and expression of 
ZEB1. In addition, inhibition of ZEB1 was able to abrogate the HIF-1a-induced EMT
and cell invasion. HIF-1a expression was highly correlated with the expression of
ZEB1 in normal colorectal epithelium, primary and metastatic CRC tissues.
Interestingly, both HIF-1a and ZEB1 were positively associated with Vimentin, an 
important mesenchymal marker of EMT, whereas negatively associated with
E-cadherin expression. These findings suggest that HIF-1a enhances EMT and cancer
metastasis by binding to ZEB1 promoter in CRC. HIF-1a and ZEB1 are both widely
considered as tumor-initiating factors, but our results demonstrate that ZEB1 is 
a direct downstream of HIF-1a, suggesting a novel molecular mechanism for
HIF-1a-inducing EMT and cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4461314
PMID: 26057751  [PubMed - in process]


177. Cancer Lett. 2015 Sep 1;365(2):190-200. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.05.029. Epub
2015 Jun 3.

BCL6 induces EMT by promoting the ZEB1-mediated transcription repression of
E-cadherin in breast cancer cells.

Yu JM(1), Sun W(1), Hua F(1), Xie J(1), Lin H(1), Zhou DD(1), Hu ZW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Pharmacology Group, The State Key Laboratory of
Natural Product Structure and Function, The Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 1 Xian Nong Tan
Street, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Molecular Immunology and Pharmacology Group,
The State Key Laboratory of Natural Product Structure and Function, The Institute
of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College, 1 Xian Nong Tan Street, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address:
huzhuowei@imm.ac.cn.

B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6), a transcriptional repressor, is involved in the
development and progression of breast cancers with uncertain mechanism. The
purpose of this study is to investigate the potential effect and mechanism of
BCL6 in the regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a critical
cellular process for controlling the development and progression of breast
cancers. We found that BCL6 promoted invasion, migration and growth by
stimulating EMT in breast cancer cells. BCL6 induced EMT by enhancing the
expression of transcriptional repressor ZEB1 which bound to the E-cadherin
promoter and repressing the E-cadherin transcription. Deletion of ZEB1 protected 
against the pro-EMT roles of BCL6 by restoring the expression of E-cadherin in
these cells. Moreover, inhibition of BCL6 with BCL6 inhibitor 79-6 suppressed
these functions of BCL6 in breast cancer cells. These findings indicate that BCL6
promotes EMT via enhancing the ZEB1-mediated transcriptional repression of
E-cadherin in breast cancer cells. Targeting BCL6 has therapeutic potential
against the development and progression of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26049022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 15;5(3):1169-79. eCollection 2015.

Interleukin-17-induced EMT promotes lung cancer cell migration and invasion via
NF-<U+03BA>B/ZEB1 signal pathway.

Gu K(1), Li MM(2), Shen J(1), Liu F(1), Cao JY(1), Jin S(1), Yu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Harbin
Medical University Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, China. (2)Department of
Anesthesiology, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Harbin Medical University
Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, China.

Inflammatory cytokine interleukin-17 (IL-17) has been associated with the risk of
progressive cancers including lung cancer. However, it remains unclear how IL-17 
may contribute to the invasion and development of these inflammation-associated
malignancies. Here we aimed to investigate the role of IL-17 in lung cancer cell 
development. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been recently proposed
as a developmental process which plays an important role in cancer progression
and metastases. Here we show that IL-17 might promote EMT in lung cancer cells by
inducing the transcriptional repressor ZEB1. Exposure to IL-17 upregulated the
signature EMT phenotypic markers vimentin and E-cadherin in lung cancer cells,
and compared with controls, increased cell migration was observed in
IL-17-treated lung cancer cells. ZEB1 mRNA and protein expression was induced by 
IL-17, and IL-17 stimulated nuclear localization of phosphorylated ZEB1.
Conversely, suppressing ZEB1 expression by ZEB1 siRNA abrogated IL-17-stimulated 
vimentin expression and cell migration. Moreover, the phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>Ba was
required for IL-17-induced expression of ZEB1, suggesting the involvement of
canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. To check this hypothesis, we used IKK inhibitor BAY
11-7028 to block NF-<U+03BA>B activity. We found that BAY 11-7028 abrogated
IL-17-induced ZEB1 expression, cell migration, and EMT, thus confirming that
NF-<U+03BA>B is required for IL-17 to induce these aggressive phenotypes in lung cancer 
cells. Taken together, our data support the idea that IL-17-induced EMT promotes 
lung cancer cell migration and invasion via NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated upregulation of ZEB1. 
This study reveals a new signaling axis through which the tumor microenvironment 
causes ZEB1 expression to promote cancer metastasis. We suggest that targeting
IL-17-induced ZEB1 expression may offer an effective therapeutic strategy for
lung cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4449444
PMID: 26045995  [PubMed]


179. Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug;34(2):610-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4034. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Adrenomedullin promotes intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma metastasis and
invasion by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Zhou C(1), Zheng Y(2), Li L(3), Zhai W(1), Li R(1), Liang Z(1), Zhao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Af<U+FB01>liated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China. (2)Institutes of Biomedical
Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Dermatology, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan 450053, P.R. China.

Intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma (ICC) is the second most common type of 
primary liver cancer. However, its etiology and molecular pathogenesis remain
largely unknown. The present study aimed to investigate the association between
adrenomedullin (ADM) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in ICC and to
elucidate the underlying signaling pathway. We evaluated the clinical
significance of ADM in 133 ICC patients using tissue microarray analysis of ICC
tissues. We also investigated the mechanisms of ADM in ICC EMT-mediated
metastasis in cholangiocarcinoma cell lines in vitro. The results revealed that
ADM was upregulated in human ICC tissues (73/133) compared with that in healthy
controls. ADM expression was positively correlated with shorter overall survival 
(P<0.01). The characteristics of EMT were induced in vitro by adenoviral
transduction of ADM into HuCCT1 cells, resulting in the downregulation of
E-cadherin and ZO-1, and the concomitant upregulation of N-cadherin and vimentin.
Knockdown of ADM by short hairpin RNA in HUH28 cells expressing high levels of
ADM was associated with the reversal of EMT. Functional studies revealed that ADM
regulated the activation of ZEB1, which subsequently mediated EMT. The results of
the present study suggest that ADM plays an important role in ICC metastasis, and
that ADM signaling of EMT may represent a valuable therapeutic target in cancer
patients.

PMCID: PMC4508861
PMID: 26043778  [PubMed - in process]


180. Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug;34(2):771-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4032. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Expression of BMI1 and ZEB1 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition of tongue
squamous cell carcinoma.

Kurihara K(1), Isobe T(2), Yamamoto G(2), Tanaka Y(3), Katakura A(1), Tachikawa
T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Tokyo Dental
College, Ichikawa, Chiba 272-8513, Japan. (2)Division of Pathology, Department of
Oral Diagnostic Sciences, School of Dentistry, Showa University, Shinagawa-ku,
Tokyo 142-8555, Japan. (3)Division of Surgical Pathology, Clinical Laboratory,
Ichikawa General Hospital, Ichikawa, Chiba 272-8513, Japan. (4)Innovative
Research Center of Oral Cancer, Showa University, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8555,
Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial event required for the
invasion and progression of carcinogenesis, inducing stem-like properties in
epithelial cells. In the present study, the expression of BMI1, which controls
self-renewal in stem cells, as well as that of ZEB1, a transcription factor that 
regulates EMT, was evaluated for its role in EMT and the carcinogenic processes
of tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC). Collagen invasion assays using two TSCC
cells and 64 tongue specimens (32 carcinomas and 32 dysplasias) were employed and
analyzed in the present study. We assessed the protein and mRNA expression levels
of BMI1, ZEB1, vimentin and E-cadherin in the two cell lines and tumor tissues.
The protein and mRNA expression of BMI1 and ZEB1 occurred at the invasion of
TSCC. The elevated levels of BMI1 and ZEB1 were accompanied by the downregulation
of E-cadherin and upregulation of vimentin at the invasive front, indicative of
EMT in vitro and in vivo. The results showed that BMI1 and ZEB1 are important
factors in association with the promotion of EMT and invasion of TSCC.

PMID: 26043676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 21;6(24):20177-89.

The 14-3-3s/GSK3ß/ß-catenin/ZEB1 regulatory loop modulates chemo-sensitivity in
human tongue cancer.

Peng C(1), Jia X(1), Xiong Y(2), Yin J(1), Li N(1), Deng Y(1), Luo K(1), Zhang
Q(1), Wang C(1), Zhang Z(1), Zheng G(1), He Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou 510095, Guangdong, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Guangzhou
Institute of Snake Venom Research, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou 511436, Guangdong, China.

Here we demonstrated that chemotherapy induced 14-3-3s expression in tongue
cancer (TC) cells and overexpressed 14-3-3s sensitized TC cells to chemotherapy
especially in multidrug resistant TC (MDR-TC) cells. In agreement, 14-3-3s
knockdown enhanced resistance of TC cells to chemotherapy. Mechanically, we found
14-3-3s physically bound to GSK3ß in protein level and the binding inhibited
ß-catenin signaling. Coincidentally, chemotherapy as well as 14-3-3s
overexpression led to increase of GSK3ß protein level. Increased GSK3ß protein
sensitized TC cells to chemotherapy. Moreover, deregulation of
14-3-3s/GSK3ß/ß-catenin axis led to overexpressed ZEB1 in TC cells, especially in
MDR-TC cells. As a negative feedback loop, ZEB1 bond to 14-3-3s promoter to
enhance promoter hypermethylation in TC cells. Promoter hypermethylation resulted
into the decrease of 14-3-3s expression. Importantly, a positive correlation was 
observed between 14-3-3s and GSK3ß protein expression in TC tissues from patients
receiving chemotherapy. High levels of 14-3-3s and GSK3ß were associated with
better prognosis in TC patients.

PMCID: PMC4652996
PMID: 26036631  [PubMed - in process]


182. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Sep;97(5):942-56. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13078. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Autoregulation of ZEB2 expression for zearalenone production in Fusarium
graminearum.

Park AR(1), Son H(1), Min K(1), Park J(1), Goo JH(2), Rhee S(1), Chae SK(3), Lee 
YW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Center for Fungal Pathogenesis,
Seoul National University, 151-921, Seoul, Korea. (2)Jeonnam Nano Bio Research
Center, 515-853, Jangseong, Korea. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Paichai
University, 302-735, Daejeon, Korea.

Several Fusarium species produce the polyketide mycotoxin zearalenone (ZEA), a
causative agent of hyperestrogenic syndrome in animals that is often found in
F.<U+2009>graminearum-infected cereals in temperate regions. The ZEA biosynthetic
cluster genes PKS4, PKS13, ZEB1 and ZEB2 encode a reducing polyketide synthase, a
non-reducing polyketide synthase, an isoamyl alcohol oxidase and a transcription 
factor respectively. In this study, the production of two isoforms (ZEB2L and
ZEB2S) from the ZEB2 gene in F.<U+2009>graminearum via an alternative promoter was
characterized. ZEB2L contains a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) DNA-binding domain at
the N-terminus, whereas ZEB2S is an N-terminally truncated form of ZEB2L that
lacks the bZIP domain. Interestingly, ZEA triggers the induction of both ZEB2L
and ZEB2S transcription. ZEB2L and ZEB2S interact with each other to form a
heterodimer that regulates ZEA production by reducing the binding affinity of
ZEB2L for the ZEB2L gene promoter. Our study provides insight into the
autoregulation of ZEB2 expression by alternative promoter usage and a feedback
loop during ZEA production; this regulatory mechanism is similar to that observed
in higher eukaryotes.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26036360  [PubMed - in process]


183. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 31;463(3):315-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.062. Epub 2015 May 27.

miR-139-5p inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration and invasion of 
hepatocellular carcinoma cells by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2.

Qiu G(1), Lin Y(1), Zhang H(1), Wu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, China. (2)Department of General 
Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150086, China. Electronic address: wdq04510451@163.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cause of cancer deaths
worldwide. miRNAs have been suggested to have important roles in HCC development.
The purpose of this study was to determine the role of miR-139-5p in regulation
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis of HCC cells.
Expression levels of miR-139-5p in 49 HCC specimens with adjacent tissues and
five HCC cell lines were assessed by quantitative RT-PCR. We found that
miR-139-5p was down-regulated in 89.7% of the HCC tissue samples and all of the
HCC cell lines. In addition, luciferase reporter assays validated direct binding 
of miR-139-5p to the 3' untranslated region of zinc finger E-box binding homeobox
1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2. Ectopic expression of miR-139-5p suppressed and miR-139-in
promoted EMT, migration, and invasion in Hep3B and SMMC7721 cells. Furthermore,
over-expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 ablated the inhibitory effects of miR-139-5p on 
migration and invasion in HCC cells. Our study indicates that miR-139-5p
functions as a suppressor of HCC EMT and metastasis by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2,
and it may be a therapeutic target for metastatic HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26022123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Pharmazie. 2015 Apr;70(4):256-62.

Nobiletin inhibited hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition of lung
cancer cells by inactivating of Notch-1 signaling and switching on miR-200b.

Gao XJ, Liu JW, Zhang QG, Zhang JJ, Xu HT, Liu HJ.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an early step in the process of tumor 
metastasis. It is well known that tumor microenvironment affects malignancy in
various carcinomas; in particular, that hypoxia induces EMT. Deregulated notch
signaling also contributes a lot to the development of EMT in lung cancer. In
this study, we investigated the use of Notch-1-inhibiting compound as novel
therapeutic candidates to regulate hypoxia-induced EMT in lung cancer cells.
According to previous screening, nobiletin was selected as a Notch-1 inhibitor.
Hypoxia-induced EMT was characteristic of increased N-cadherin & vimentin
expressions and decreased E-cadherin expressions. Treatment with nobiletin
notably attenuated hypoxia-induced EMT, invasion and migration in H1299 cells,
accompanied with reduced Notch-1, Jagged1/2 expressions and its downstream genes 
Hey-1 and Hes-1. Nobiletin treatment also promoted tumorsuppressive miR-200b
level. Moreover, notch-1 siRNA prevented hypoxia-mediated cell migration and
decreased Twist1, Snail1, and ZEB1/2 expressions, which are key EMT markers.
Re-expression of miR-200b blocked hypoxia-induced EMT and cell invasion. Our
findings suggest that downregulation of Notch-1 and reexpression of miR-200b by
nobiletin might be a novel remedy for the therapy of lung cancer.

PMID: 26012256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cancer Sci. 2015 Aug;106(8):982-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12699. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

53BP1 suppresses epithelial-mesenchymal transition by downregulating ZEB1 through
microRNA-200b/429 in breast cancer.

Kong X(1), Ding X(2), Li X(1), Gao S(1), Yang Q(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
China. (2)Department of Oncology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
China. (3)Pathology Tissue Bank, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important mechanism of cancer
invasion and metastasis. Although p53 binding protein 1 (53BP1) has been
implicated in several biological processes, its function in EMT of human cancers 
has not yet been reported. Here, we show that 53BP1 negatively regulated EMT by
modulating ZEB1 through targeting microRNA (miR)-200b and miR-429. Furthermore,
53BP1 promoted ZEB1-mediated upregulation of E-cadherin and also inhibited the
expressions of mesenchymal markers, leading to increased migration and invasion
in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Consistently, in MCF-7 breast cancer cells,
low 53BP1 expression reduced E-cadherin expression, resulting in increased
migration and invasion. These effects were reversed by miR-200b and miR-429
inhibition or overexpression. Sections of tumor xenograft model showed increased 
ZEB1 expression and decreased E-cadherin expression with the downregulation of
53BP1. In 18 clinical tissue samples, expression of 53BP1 was positively
correlated with miR-200b and mir-429 and negatively correlated with ZEB1. It was 
also found that 53BP1 was associated with lymph node metastasis. Taken together, 
these results suggest that 53BP1 functioned as a tumor suppressor gene by its
novel negative control of EMT through regulating the expression of miR-200b/429
and their target gene ZEB1.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4556386
PMID: 26011542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jul 13;43(12):5838-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv508. Epub 2015
May 24.

Dynamics of MBD2 deposition across methylated DNA regions during malignant
transformation of human mammary epithelial cells.

Devailly G(1), Grandin M(1), Perriaud L(2), Mathot P(1), Delcros JG(1), Bidet
Y(3), Morel AP(4), Bignon JY(3), Puisieux A(4), Mehlen P(1), Dante R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dependence Receptors, Cancer and Development Laboratory - Equipe labellisée
'La Ligue', LabEx DEVweCAN, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon (CRCL),
INSERM U1052-CNRS UMR5286, Université de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, 69008 Lyon,
France. (2)Institut Curie and INSERM U612, Centre Universitaire, 91405, Orsay,
France. (3)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Centre Jean Perrin, 63011
Clermont-Ferrand, France. (4)EMT and cancer cell plasticity Laboratory - Equipe
labellisée 'La Ligue', LabEx DEVweCAN, CRCL, INSERM U1052-CNRS UMR5286,
Université de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, 69008 Lyon, France. (5)Dependence
Receptors, Cancer and Development Laboratory - Equipe labellisée 'La Ligue',
LabEx DEVweCAN, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon (CRCL), INSERM
U1052-CNRS UMR5286, Université de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, 69008 Lyon, France
dante@univ-lyon1.fr.

DNA methylation is thought to induce transcriptional silencing through the
combination of two mechanisms: the repulsion of transcriptional activators unable
to bind their target sites when methylated, and the recruitment of
transcriptional repressors with specific affinity for methylated DNA. The Methyl 
CpG Binding Domain proteins MeCP2, MBD1 and MBD2 belong to the latter category.
Here, we present MBD2 ChIPseq data obtained from the endogenous MBD2 in an
isogenic cellular model of oncogenic transformation of human mammary cells. In
immortalized (HMEC-hTERT) or transformed (HMLER) cells, MBD2 was found in a large
proportion of methylated regions and associated with transcriptional silencing. A
redistribution of MBD2 on methylated DNA occurred during oncogenic
transformation, frequently independently of local DNA methylation changes. Genes 
downregulated during HMEC-hTERT transformation preferentially gained MBD2 on
their promoter. Furthermore, depletion of MBD2 induced an upregulation of
MBD2-bound genes methylated at their promoter regions, in HMLER cells. Among the 
3,160 genes downregulated in transformed cells, 380 genes were methylated at
their promoter regions in both cell lines, specifically associated by MBD2 in
HMLER cells, and upregulated upon MBD2 depletion in HMLER. The transcriptional
MBD2-dependent downregulation occurring during oncogenic transformation was also 
observed in two additional models of mammary cell transformation. Thus, the
dynamics of MBD2 deposition across methylated DNA regions was associated with the
oncogenic transformation of human mammary cells.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4499136
PMID: 26007656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jul;36(1):166-72. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2215. Epub 2015 May 
19.

The ectopic expression of Snail in MDBK cells does not induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Izawa G(1), Kobayashi W(1), Haraguchi M(1), Sudo A(2), Ozawa M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan.
(2)Department of Sport and Physical Education, Faculty of Physical Education,
Kokushikan University, Tama-shi, Tokyo 206-8515, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a key process in the tumor metastatic
cascade, is characterized by the loss of cell-cell junctions and cell polarity,
as well as by the acquisition of migratory and invasive properties. However, the 
precise molecular events that initiate this complex EMT process are poorly
understood. Snail expression induces EMT in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK)
cells and the human epidermoid carcinoma cell line, A431. Snail is a zinc finger 
transcription factor and triggers EMT by suppressing E-cadherin expression. In
the present study, to broaden our knowledge of Snail-induced EMT, we generated
stable Snail transfectants using Madin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells. Contrary
to the MDCK or A431 cells examined in our previous studies, the MDBK cells
transfected with the Snail construct maintained an epithelial morphology and
showed no sign of reduced cell-cell adhesiveness compared to the control cells.
Consistent with these observations, the downregulation of epithelial marker
proteins, e.g. E-cadherin and desmoglein, and the upregulation of mesenchymal
marker proteins, e.g., N-cadherin and fibronectin, were not detected.
Furthermore, the E-cadherin promoter was not methylated. Therefore, in the MDBK
cells, the ectopic expression of Snail failed to induce EMT. As previously
demonstrated, in MDCK cells, Snail expression is accompanied by the increased
expression of other EMT-inducing transcription factors, e.g., Slug and zinc
finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1). However, the MDBK cells transfected with 
the Snail construct did not exhibit an increased expression of these factors.
Thus, it is possible that the failure to upregulate other EMT-related
transcription factors may explain the lack of Snail-mediated induction of EMT in 
MDBK cells.

PMCID: PMC4494602
PMID: 25998899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jun 9;112(12):1944-50. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.177. Epub 2015 May
19.

Expression of E-cadherin repressors SNAIL, ZEB1 and ZEB2 by tumour and stromal
cells influences tumour-budding phenotype and suggests heterogeneity of stromal
cells in pancreatic cancer.

Galván JA(1), Zlobec I(1), Wartenberg M(2), Lugli A(2), Gloor B(3), Perren A(2), 
Karamitopoulou E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Unit, Institute of Pathology, University of Bern,
Murtenstrasse 31, Bern CH-3010, Switzerland. (2)1] Translational Research Unit,
Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Murtenstrasse 31, Bern CH-3010,
Switzerland [2] Division of Clinical Pathology, Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern, Murtenstrasse 31, Bern CH-3010, Switzerland. (3)Department of
Visceral Surgery, Insel University Hospital, Freiburgstrasse 4, CH-3010 Bern,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: There is evidence that tumour-stroma interactions have a major role
in the neoplastic progression of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Tumour 
budding is thought to reflect the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT); however, the relationship between tumour buds and EMT remains unclear.
Here we characterize the tumour-budding- and stromal cells in PDAC at protein and
mRNA levels concerning factors involved in EMT.
METHODS: mRNA in situ hybridisation and immunostaining for E-cadherin, ß-catenin,
SNAIL1, ZEB1, ZEB2, N-cadherin and TWIST1 were assessed in the main tumour,
tumour buds and tumour stroma on multipunch tissue microarrays from 120
well-characterised PDACs and associated with the clinicopathological features,
including peritumoural (PTB) and intratumoural (ITB) budding.
RESULTS: Tumour-budding cells showed increased levels of ZEB1 (P<0.0001) and ZEB2
(P=0.0119) and reduced E-cadherin and ß-catenin (P<0.0001, each) compared with
the main tumour. Loss of membranous ß-catenin in the main tumour (P=0.0009) and
tumour buds (P=0.0053), without nuclear translocation, as well as increased
SNAIL1 in tumour and stromal cells (P=0.0002, each) correlated with high PTB.
ZEB1 overexpression in the main tumour-budding and stromal cells was associated
with high ITB (P=0.0084; 0.0250 and 0.0029, respectively) and high PTB (P=0.0005;
0.0392 and 0.0007, respectively). ZEB2 overexpression in stromal cells correlated
with higher pT stage (P=0.03), lymphatic invasion (P=0.0172) and lymph node
metastasis (P=0.0152).
CONCLUSIONS: In the tumour microenvironment of phenotypically aggressive PDAC,
tumour-budding cells express EMT hallmarks at protein and mRNA levels underlining
their EMT-type character and are surrounded by stromal cells expressing high
levels of the E-cadherin repressors ZEB1, ZEB2 and SNAIL1, this being strongly
associated with the tumour-budding phenotype. Moreover, our findings suggest the 
existence of subtypes of stromal cells in PDAC with phenotypical and functional
heterogeneity.

PMCID: PMC4580384 [Available on 2016-06-09]
PMID: 25989272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Sci Rep. 2015 May 19;5:10205. doi: 10.1038/srep10205.

The pluripotency factor NANOG promotes the formation of squamous cell carcinomas.

Palla AR, Piazzolla D, Alcazar N, Cañamero M, Graña O, Gómez-López G, Dominguez
O, Dueñas M(1), Paramio JM(1), Serrano M.

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT, Madrid 28040, Spain [2] Oncogenomic Unit, 
Institute of Biomedical Research, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", Madrid
28040, Spain.

NANOG is a key pluripotency factor in embryonic stem cells that is frequently
expressed in squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). However, a direct link between
NANOG and SCCs remains to be established. Here, we show that inducible
overexpression of NANOG in mouse skin epithelia favours the malignant conversion 
of skin papillomas induced by chemical carcinogenesis, leading to increased SCC
formation. Gene expression analyses in pre-malignant skin indicate that NANOG
induces genes associated to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Some of
these genes are directly activated by NANOG, including EMT-associated genes Zeb1,
Zeb2, Twist1, Prrx1 and miR-21. Finally, endogenous NANOG binds to the promoters 
of theses genes in human SCC cells and, moreover, NANOG induces EMT features in
primary keratinocytes. These results provide in vivo evidence for the oncogenic
role of NANOG in squamous cell carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4437308
PMID: 25988972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015 Dec;22 Suppl 3:915-22. doi: 10.1245/s10434-015-4554-8. Epub 
2015 May 19.

A Long Non-coding RNA Activated by Transforming Growth Factor-ß is an Independent
Prognostic Marker of Gastric Cancer.

Saito T(1,)(2), Kurashige J(1), Nambara S(1), Komatsu H(1), Hirata H(1), Ueda
M(1), Sakimura S(1), Uchi R(1), Takano Y(1), Shinden Y(1), Iguchi T(1), Eguchi
H(1), Ehata S(3), Murakami K(2), Sugimachi K(1), Mimori K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Oita University Hospital, Yufu, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu
Hospital, Beppu, Japan. kmimori@beppu.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: A recent study reported that long non-coding RNA activated by TGF-ß
(lncRNA-ATB) induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through the
transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)/miR-200s/ZEB axis in hepatocellular
carcinoma. Herein, we focused on the clinical significance of lncRNA-ATB in
gastric cancer (GC) patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed to examine expression of lncRNA-ATB, miR-200b,
and miR-200c in GC tissues (n = 183). Patients were divided into high and low
lncRNA-ATB expression groups using a cutoff of lncRNA-ATB/GAPDH =0.60 or <0.60 to
determine the clinicopathological significance of lncRNA-ATB in GC. Moreover, we 
evaluated the expression of TGF-ß, lncRNA-ATB, miR-200s, and ZEB1 in GC cell
lines by qRT-PCR. GC cell lines were treated by recombinant TGF-ß1 or TGF-ß
receptor inhibitor to examine morphologic changes and genetic alterations, such
as lncRNA-ATB, miR-200s, and ZEB1 levels, with respect to the EMT phenotype.
RESULTS: The high lncRNA-ATB group experienced a lower overall survival rate
compared with the low lncRNA-ATB group, and multivariate analysis indicated that 
lncRNA-ATB was an independent prognostic factor (hazard ratio 3.50; 95 % CI
1.73-7.44; p = 0.0004). miR-200c levels were lower and ZEB1 levels were higher in
the high lncRNA-ATB group than in the low lncRNA-ATB group. Treatment with TGF-ß 
in GC cell lines resulted in morphological EMT changes, upregulation of
lncRNA-ATB and ZEB1, and downregulation of miR-200c and CDH1. SB431542 reduced
lncRNA-ATB expression.
CONCLUSION: LncRNA-ATB plays an important role in EMT to promote invasion and
metastasis through the TGF-ß/miR-200s/ZEB axis, resulting in a poor prognosis in 
GC. LncRNA-ATB is a novel biomarker of lncRNA, indicative of a poor prognosis in 
GC patients.

PMID: 25986864  [PubMed - in process]


191. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Sep;12(3):3416-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3789. Epub 2015 May
15.

MicroRNA-141 inhibits migration of gastric cancer by targeting zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 2.

Du Y(1), Wang L(2), Wu H(3), Zhang Y(4), Wang K(4), Wu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310016, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Pharmacy, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China. (3)Institute of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310016, P.R. China.

Human microRNA (miR)-141 is a member of the miR-200 family, which has been
reported to be downregulated in gastric cancer, and involved in the proliferation
of gastric cancer cells. However, little is currently known regarding its role in
the migration of gastric cancer. The present study investigated the function of
miR-141 in gastric cancer cell migration, and evaluated the contribution of zinc 
finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 and 2 (ZEB1/2) in miR-141 mediated migration of
gastric cancer cells. The expression levels of miR-141 and its potential ZEB1/2
targets were examined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and
western blotting, respectively. The migration of SGC-7901 and HGC-27 gastric
cancer cells, which had been transfected with an miRNA precursor, was examined by
cell migration and wound healing assays. A luciferase activity assay was used to 
validate whether ZEB1/2 was a direct target of miR-141. The results demonstrated 
that overexpression of miR-141 markedly inhibited the migration of gastric cancer
cells in vitro. Forced overexpression of miR-141 significantly reduced the
luciferase activity of the 3'-untranslated region of ZEB2 in gastric cancer
cells. Furthermore, the mRNA and protein expression levels of ZEB2 were reduced
in cells overexpressing miR-141, whereas the protein expression levels of
E-cadherin were increased. In gastric tumor samples the expression levels of ZEB2
were inversely correlated with the expression of miR-141. These results suggest
that miR-141 may be involved in the inhibition of gastric cancer cell migration, 
and that ZEB2 is a target gene of miR-141.

PMCID: PMC4526097
PMID: 25975736  [PubMed - in process]


192. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 10;6(16):14399-412.

The EMT-activator ZEB1 induces bone metastasis associated genes including
BMP-inhibitors.

Mock K(1,)(2), Preca BT(1,)(2), Brummer T(3), Brabletz S(4), Stemmler MP(4),
Brabletz T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany. (2)Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University Medical Center
Freiburg, Germany and Center for Biological Signalling Studies BIOSS,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (4)Department of
Experimental Medicine I, Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine,
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Tumor cell invasion, dissemination and metastasis is triggered by an aberrant
activation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), often mediated by the
transcription factor ZEB1. Disseminating tumor cells must acquire specific
features that allow them to colonize at different organ sites. Here we identify a
set of genes that is highly expressed in breast cancer bone metastasis and
activated by ZEB1. This gene set includes various secreted factors, e.g. the
BMP-inhibitor FST, that are described to reorganize the bone microenvironment. By
inactivating BMP-signaling, BMP-inhibitors are well-known to induce osteolysis in
development and disease. We here demonstrate that the expression of ZEB1 and
BMP-inhibitors is correlated with bone metastasis, but not with brain or lung
metastasis of breast cancer patients. In addition, we show that this correlated
expression pattern is causally linked, as ZEB1 induces the expression of the
BMP-inhibitors NOG, FST and CHRDL1 both by directly increasing their gene
transcription, as well as by indirectly suppressing their reduction via miR-200
family members. Consequently, ZEB1 stimulates BMP-inhibitor mediated osteoclast
differentiation. These findings suggest that ZEB1 is not only driving EMT, but
also contributes to the formation of osteolytic bone metastases in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4546475
PMID: 25973542  [PubMed - in process]


193. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 15;5(2):748-55. eCollection 2015.

Wnt signaling through Snail1 and Zeb1 regulates bone metastasis in lung cancer.

Yang X(1), Li L(1), Huang Q(1), Xu W(1), Cai X(1), Zhang J(1), Yan W(1), Song
D(1), Liu T(1), Zhou W(1), Li Z(1), Yang C(1), Dang Y(2), Xiao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Oncology, Changzheng Hospital, The Second Military
Medical University 415 Fengyang Road, Shanghai 200003, China. (2)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, School of
Life Sciences, East China Normal University 500 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200241, 
China.

Wnt-ß-catenin signaling participates in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in a variety of cancers; however, its role in lung cancer induced bone
metastasis and the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate
that ß-catenin, Snail1 and Zeb1 were significantly upregulated in bone metastasis
tissues from human and mouse compared with the normal controls. E-cadherin
expression is negatively regulated by Zeb1, Snail1 and ß-catenin during bone
metastasis tissues induced by lung cancer. Knocking down Zeb1 and Snail1 in lung 
cancer cell lines showed increased E-cadherin mRNA expression and less invasion
compared with the original cell lines. In addition, ß-catenin knockdown led to
the increase of E-cadherin and the decrease of Zeb1 and Snail1, which in turn
inhibited the invasive properties of lung cancer. Our results demonstrated that
Wnt signaling through Snail1 and Zeb1 regulates bone metastasis in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4396030
PMID: 25973312  [PubMed]


194. Mol Cancer. 2015 May 14;14:102. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0370-9.

Restin suppressed epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor metastasis in
breast cancer cells through upregulating mir-200a/b expression via association
with p73.

Lu Z(1), Jiao D(2), Qiao J(3), Yang S(4), Yan M(5), Cui S(6), Liu Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast surgery, Breast Cancer Center, Affiliated Cancer Hospital
of Zhengzhou University, Henan Cancer Hospital, #127 Dongming Road, Zhengzhou,
Henan, 450008, People's Republic of China. zhend.lu@163.com. (2)Department of
Breast surgery, Breast Cancer Center, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, #127 Dongming Road, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450008, 
People's Republic of China. dehuang_jiao2008@126.com. (3)Department of Breast
surgery, Breast Cancer Center, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, #127 Dongming Road, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450008, 
People's Republic of China. jhqiaojhqiao00@gmail.com. (4)Department of Pathogen
Biology, Basic Medical College of Zhengzhou University, #100 Science Road,
Zhengzhou, 450001, People's Republic of China. yangsensen20140721@126.com.
(5)Department of Breast surgery, Breast Cancer Center, Affiliated Cancer Hospital
of Zhengzhou University, Henan Cancer Hospital, #127 Dongming Road, Zhengzhou,
Henan, 450008, People's Republic of China. minyan@fdyg.edu.cn. (6)Department of
Breast surgery, Breast Cancer Center, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, #127 Dongming Road, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450008, 
People's Republic of China. cuishude73@gmail.com. (7)Department of Breast
surgery, Breast Cancer Center, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, #127 Dongming Road, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450008, 
People's Republic of China. zhenzhenliu73@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Restin belongs to MAGE superfamily and is known as MAGE H1. Restin
was firstly cloned from HL-60 cells treated with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). 
Previous studies showed a pro-apoptotic role of Restin in several cell lines.
However, little information is available on its expression patterns and functions
in vivo. Our study was performed to detect if Restin plays a role in breast
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Real-time PCR and western blot were conducted to detect
Restin expression in multiple breast cancer cell lines and Restin level was
negatively related with cell motility. Restin overexpression and knockdown stable
cell lines were established by transducing lentivirus into MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
cells. Cell morphology, wound closure assay, transwell migration and invasion
assays were performed to detect if Restin inhibited EMT. Our data showed that
Restin overexpressed cells exhibited classical epithelial cell morphology, and
Restin overexpression resulted in activation of epithelial markers and
suppression of mesenchymal markers, and inhibition of cell migration and
invasion. Tumor xenograft model was used to characterize the biological functions
of Restin in vivo. We found that Restin overexpression led to reduced lung
metastasis. Real-time PCR, western blot, luciferase assay and ChIP assay were
performed to identify the potential targets of Restin and the underlying
molecular mechanisms. Among several master regulators of EMT, only ZEB1/2 levels 
were dramatically inhibited by Restin. Unexpectedly, Restin indirectly regulated 
ZEB1/2 expression at post-transcriptional level. We further identified
mir-200a/b, well-characterized mediators controlling ZEB1/2 expression, were
transcriptionally activated by Restin and the regulation was dependent on the p53
binding site in mir-200b/a/429 promoter. Further mechanical studies demonstrated 
Restin interacted with p73, one of p53 family members, which contributed to
Restin-mediated activation of mir-200a/b and suppression of ZEB1/2.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results suggest that Restin inhibits EMT and
tumor metastasis by controlling the expression of the tumor metastasis suppressor
mir-200a/b via association with p73. Our findings not only establish a
mechanistic link between Restin, EMT and tumor metastasis, but also provide
strong evidence supporting the notion that MAGE Group II proteins may exert a
tumor suppressive effect in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4429374
PMID: 25972084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Fertil Steril. 2015 Jun;103(6):1606-14.e1-2. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.03.016. Epub 2015 May 8.

ZEB1 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cervical cancer metastasis.

Ran J(1), Lin DL(2), Wu RF(3), Chen QH(4), Huang HP(4), Qiu NX(4), Quan S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Nan Fang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China; Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University, Xiamen, People's Republic of
China. (2)Reproductive Medicine Center, Nan Fang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Cellular Stress Biology and Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for
Coastal and Wetland Ecosystems, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University,
Xiamen, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University, Xiamen, People's Republic of
China. (5)Reproductive Medicine Center, Nan Fang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
quansong@smu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate role of Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) in 
cervical cancer tissue (squamous cell carcinoma, SCC).
DESIGN: Exploratory study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENT(S): Sixty patients with SCC, including stage CINIII (n = 10), IB1 (n =
10), IB2 (n = 10), IIA1 (n = 10), IIA2 (n = 10), and IIB (n = 10) were studied.
INTERVENTION(S): Caski cells were transfected with recombinant shZEB1 lentivirus 
or shCtrl lentivirus to generate stable ZEB1-knockdown Caski cells.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): ZEB1 expression was analyzed by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry in cervical cancer tissues.
ZEB1 expression in Caski cells was down-regulated by short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)
interference, and changes in ZEB1 expression corresponded with changes in the
proliferation and migratory ability of Caski cells.
RESULT(S): Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry results revealed that ZEB1 expression and the ratio of
Vimentin to E-cadherin were high in 27 of 50 SCC patients and correlated with
advanced International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage, tumor size 
>4 cm, and parametrial invasion. However, the expression of ZEB1 in cervical
cancer tissue was independent of age and SCC antigen level. Transfection of ZEB1 
shRNA in Caski cells significantly decreased the messenger RNA and protein
expression of ZEB1, parallel with increased expression of the epithelial marker
E-cadherin and decreased expression of the mesenchymal marker Vimentin.
Furthermore, the proliferation and migratory ability of Caski cells were
significantly lower in the transfected group than in the nontransfected control
group.
CONCLUSION(S): Down-regulation of ZEB1 expression may protect the invasive front 
of the tumors from converting to a mesenchymal phenotype by reducing the
proliferation and motility of cervical cancer cells, suggesting that ZEB1 might
be a potential therapeutic target for SCC.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25963537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cancer Invest. 2015 Jul;33(6):225-31. doi: 10.3109/07357907.2015.1022258. Epub
2015 May 7.

ZEB1 expression is correlated with tumor metastasis and reduced prognosis of
breast carcinoma in Asian patients.

Xiang S(1), Liu YM, Chen X, Wang YW, Ma RR, Wu XJ, Gao P.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, P.
R. China.

Tumor metastasis is one of the key events leading to tumor relapse and poor
prognosis. Nowadays, increasing evidences demonstrated that ZEB1 was implicated
in human carcinogenesis. However, involvement of ZEB1 deregulation in
tumorigenesis in Asian patients with breast carcinoma remains elusive. The
present study included 102 Asian patients with breast carcinoma treated by
surgery from January of 2005 to December of 2006, and the expression of ZEB1 was 
evaluated by immunohistochemistry. To further assess the prognostic value of
ZEB1, Kaplan-Meier curves were constructed. In this study, elevated levels of
ZEB1 expression was found in carcinomas with higher aggressive potential. We also
correlated expression of ZEB1 with lymph node metastasis (P = 0.021), advanced
clinical stage (P = 0.012) in all cases, and high tumor grade (P = 0.047) in
invasive ductal carcinoma. Furthermore, our data suggested an elevated level of
Ki-67 expression in cases with positive expression of ZEB1. Clinically, reduced
overall survival and disease-free survival were observed in cases with positive
ZEB1 expression than that in negative cases. Our results correlated ZEB1 with
aggressive potentials of breast carcinoma and revealed a possibility for ZEB1 as 
a prognostic marker in breast carcinoma.

PMID: 25950745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 14;6(23):19500-13.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is associated with rapamycin resistance.

Holder AM(1,)(2), Akcakanat A(3), Adkins F(4), Evans K(3), Chen H(5), Wei C(5),
Milton DR(5), Li Y(5), Do KA(5), Janku F(3), Meric-Bernstam F(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Surgery, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. (3)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Florida, Weston, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Rapamycin analogues have antitumor efficacy in several tumor types, however few
patients demonstrate tumor regression. Thus, there is a pressing need for markers
of intrinsic response/resistance and rational combination therapies. We
hypothesized that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) confers rapamycin
resistance. We found that the epithelial marker E-cadherin protein is higher in
rapamycin sensitive (RS) cells and mesenchymal breast cancer cell lines selected 
by transcriptional EMT signatures are less sensitive to rapamycin. MCF7 cells,
transfected with constitutively active mutant Snail, had increased rapamycin
resistance (RR) compared to cells transfected with wild-type Snail. Conversely,
we transfected two RR mesenchymal cell lines-ACHN and MDA-MB-231-with miR-200b/c 
or ZEB1 siRNA to promote mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition. This induced
E-cadherin expression in both cell lines, and ACHN demonstrated a significant
increase in RS. Treatment of ACHN and MDA-MB-231 with trametinib modulated EMT in
ACHN cells in vitro. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 and ACHN xenografts with trametinib 
in combination with rapamycin resulted in significant growth inhibition in both
but without an apparent effect on EMT. Future studies are needed to determine
whether EMT status is predictive of sensitivity to rapalogs and to determine
whether combination therapy with EMT modulating agents can enhance antitumor
effects of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4637301
PMID: 25944619  [PubMed - in process]


198. Dev Cell. 2015 May 4;33(3):343-50. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.03.021.

Zeb family members and boundary cap cells underlie developmental plasticity of
sensory nociceptive neurons.

Ohayon D(1), Ventéo S(2), Sonrier C(2), Lafon PA(2), Garcès A(2), Valmier J(3),
Rivat C(3), Topilko P(4), Carroll P(2), Pattyn A(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, 34091 Montpellier,
France; Université de Toulouse, Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR5547
CNRS, 31062 Toulouse, France. (2)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de
Montpellier, 34091 Montpellier, France. (3)INSERM U1051, Institut des
Neurosciences de Montpellier, 34091 Montpellier, France; Université Montpellier
2, 34091 Montpellier, France. (4)INSERM U1024, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230
Paris, France. (5)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, 34091 
Montpellier, France. Electronic address: alexandre.pattyn@inserm.fr.

Dorsal root ganglia (DRG) sensory neurons arise from heterogeneous precursors
that differentiate in two neurogenic waves, respectively controlled by Neurog2
and Neurog1. We show here that transgenic mice expressing a Zeb1/2
dominant-negative form (DBZEB) exhibit reduced numbers of nociceptors and altered
pain sensitivity. This reflects an early impairment of Neurog1-dependent
neurogenesis due to the depletion of specific sensory precursor pools, which is
slightly later partially compensated by the contribution of boundary cap cells
(BCCs). Indeed, combined DBZEB expression and genetic BCCs ablation entirely
deplete second wave precursors and, in turn, nociceptors, thus recapitulating the
Neurog1(-/-) neuronal phenotype. Altogether, our results uncover roles for Zeb
family members in the developing DRGs; they show that the Neurog1-dependent
sensory neurogenesis can be functionally partitioned in two successive phases;
and finally, they illustrate plasticity in the developing peripheral
somatosensory system supported by the BCCs, thereby providing a rationale for
sensory precursor diversity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25942625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Pathol. 2015 Aug;236(4):505-16. doi: 10.1002/path.4550. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Molecular profiling of tumour budding implicates TGFß-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition as a therapeutic target in oral squamous cell
carcinoma.

Jensen DH(1), Dabelsteen E(2), Specht L(3), Fiehn AM(4), Therkildsen MH(4),
Jønson L(5), Vikesaa J(5), Nielsen FC(5), von Buchwald C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology,
Rigshospitalet and University of Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Department of
Odontology, Faculty of Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Department
of Oncology, Rigshospitalet and University of Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Department 
of Pathology, Rigshospitalet and University of Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Department
of Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet and University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Although tumour budding is an adverse prognostic factor for many cancer types,
the molecular mechanisms governing this phenomenon are incompletely understood.
Therefore, understanding the molecular basis of tumour budding may provide new
therapeutic and diagnostic options. We employ digital image analysis to
demonstrate that the number of tumour buds in cytokeratin-stained sections
correlates with patients having lymph node metastases at diagnosis. The tumour
bud count was also a predictor of overall survival, independent of TNM stage.
Tumour buds and paired central tumour areas were subsequently collected from oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) specimens, using laser capture microdissection,
and examined with RNA sequencing and miRNA-qPCR arrays. Compared with cells from 
the central parts of the tumours, budding cells exhibited a particular gene
expression signature, comprising factors involved in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and activated TGFß signalling. Transcription factors ZEB1 and
PRRX1 were up-regulated concomitantly with the decreased expression of
mesenchymal-epithelial (MET) transcription factors (eg OVOL1) in addition to
Krüppel-like factors and Grainyhead-like factors. Moreover, miR-200 family
members were down-regulated in budding tumour cells. We used immunohistochemistry
to validate five markers of the EMT/MET process in 199 OSCC tumours, as well as
in situ hybridization in 20 OSCC samples. Given the strong relationship between
tumour budding and the development of lymph node metastases and an adverse
prognosis, therapeutics based on inhibiting the activation of TGFß signalling may
prove useful in the treatment of OSCC.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25925492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2015 May;45(5):474-82. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyv027. Epub 2015 Mar 
25.

miR-128 modulates chemosensitivity and invasion of prostate cancer cells through 
targeting ZEB1.

Sun X(1), Li Y(2), Yu J(2), Pei H(2), Luo P(3), Zhang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei.
(2)Jingzhou Central Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Jingzhou, Hubei. (3)Huangshi Central Hospital, Hubei Polytechnic University,
Huangshi, Hubei, PR China. (4)Department of Urology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei Huangshi Central Hospital, Hubei Polytechnic University,
Huangshi, Hubei, PR China zhangjie1231994@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: Recent reports strongly suggest the profound role of miRNAs in cancer 
therapeutic response and progression, including invasion and metastasis. The
sensitivity to therapy and invasion is the major obstacle for successful
treatment in prostate cancer. We aimed to investigate the regulative effect of
miR-128/zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 axis on prostate cancer cell
chemosensitivity and invasion.
METHODS: The miR-128 expression pattern of prostate cancer cell lines and tissues
was detected by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, while 
the mRNA and protein expression levels of zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1
were measured by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and
western blot assay, respectively. Dual-luciferase reporter gene assay was used to
find the direct target of miR-128. Furthermore, prostate cancer cells were
treated with miR-128 mimic or zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1-siRNA, and
then the cells' chemosensitivity and invasion were detected by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay and transwell 
assay, respectively.
RESULTS: We found miR-128 expression obviously decreased in prostate cancer
tissues compared with paired normal tissues. Restored miR-128 expression
sensitized prostate cancer cells to cisplatin and inhibited the invasion.
Furthermore, there was an inverse expression pattern between miR-128 and
zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 in prostate cancer cells and tissues, and
zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 was identified as a direct target of miR-128
in prostate cancer. Knockdown of zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 expression 
efficiently sensitized prostate cancer cells to cisplatin and inhibited the
invasion. However, ectopic zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 expression
impaired the effects of miR-128 on chemosensitivity and invasion in prostate
cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-128 functions as a potential cancer suppressor in prostate
cancer progression and rational therapeutic strategies for prostate cancer would 
be developed based on miR-128/zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 axis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25921099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Immunol. 2015 Aug;66(2):290-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.253. Epub 2015
Apr 21.

CRTAM is negatively regulated by ZEB1 in T cells.

Rojas-Marquez C(1), Valle-Rios R(2), Lopez-Bayghen E(3), Ortiz-Navarrete V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados (CINVESTAV)-IPN, Av. IPN No. 2508, Colonia San Pedro
Zacatenco, México, DF, Mexico. (2)Laboratorio de Investigación en Inmunología y
Proteómica, Hospital Infantil de México Fedérico Gómez, México, DF, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Toxicología, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados
(CINVESTAV)-IPN, Av. IPN No. 2508, Colonia San Pedro Zacatenco, México, DF,
Mexico. Electronic address: ebayghen@cinvestav.mx. (4)Departamento de Biomedicina
Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados (CINVESTAV)-IPN, Av.
IPN No. 2508, Colonia San Pedro Zacatenco, México, DF, Mexico. Electronic
address: vortiz@cinvestav.mx.

T cell activation leads to the induction of genes that are required for
appropriate immune responses. This includes CRTAM (Class-I MHC-restricted T cell 
associated molecule), a protein that plays a key role in T cell development,
proliferation, and generating cell polarity during activation. We previously
characterized the CRTAM promoter and described how AP-1 family members are
important for inducing CRTAM expression upon antigenic activation. Here, we show 
that CRTAM is a molecular target for ZEB1 (zinc finger E-box-binding protein), a 
homeodomain/Zn finger transcription factor. Overexpression of ZEB1 repressed
CRTAM promoter activity, as well as endogenous CRTAM levels in human T cells.
ZEB1-mediated transcriptional repression was abolished when E-box-like elements
in the CRTAM promoter are mutated. In summary, ZEB1 functions as a
transcriptional repressor for the CRTAM gene in both non-stimulated and
stimulated T cells, thereby modulating adaptive immune responses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25910959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13658-70.

MiR-200b/200c/429 subfamily negatively regulates Rho/ROCK signaling pathway to
suppress hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis.

Wong CM(1), Wei L(1), Au SL(1), Fan DN(1), Zhou Y(2), Tsang FH(1), Law CT(1), Lee
JM(1), He X(3), Shi J(2), Wong CC(1), Ng IO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and State Key Laboratory for Liver Research, Li Ka
Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Physics and Department of Biology, Centre for Quantitative
Systems Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

MiR-200 family is an important regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
has been implicated in human carcinogenesis. However, their expression and
functions in human cancers remain controversial. In the work presented here, we
showed that miR-200 family members were frequently down-regulated in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Although all five members of miR-200 family
inhibited ZEB1/2 expression in HCC cell lines, we showed that overexpression only
of the miR-200b/200c/429 subfamily, but not the miR-200a/141 subfamily, resulted 
in impeded HCC cell migration. Further investigations led to the identification
of RhoA and ROCK2 as specific down-stream targets of the miR-200b/200c/429
subfamily. We demonstrated that the miR-200b/200c/429 subfamily inhibited HCC
cell migration through modulating Rho/ROCK mediated cell cytoskeletal
reorganization and cell-substratum adhesion. Re-expression of miR-200b
significantly suppressed lung metastasis of HCC cells in an orthotopic liver
implantation model in vivo. In conclusion, our findings identified the
miR-200b/200c/429 subfamily as metastasis suppressor microRNAs in human HCC and
highlighted the functional discrepancy among miR-200 family members.

PMCID: PMC4537040
PMID: 25909223  [PubMed - in process]


203. Tumori. 2015 Mar-Apr;101(2):238-45. doi: 10.5301/tj.5000229. Epub 2015 Apr 9.

BDE-99 (2,2',4,4',5-pentabromodiphenyl ether) triggers epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in colorectal cancer cells via PI3K/Akt/Snail signaling pathway.

Wang F(1), Ruan XJ, Zhang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Beijing Military General Hospital, Beijing - China.

PURPOSE: The gut is in direct contact with BDE-99 (2,2',4,4',5-pentabromodiphenyl
ether), one of the most abundant PBDE congeners in the environment and in human
tissues. The objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of
BDE-99 on colorectal cancer (CRC) cells.
METHODS: The effects of BDE-99 on cell proliferation were measured by CCK-8 assay
in the CRC cell line HCT-116. Wound healing and transwell migration/invasion
assays were used to test the migration and invasion of CRC cells. Factors related
to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were measured by real-time PCR and 
Western blot analysis for mRNA and protein levels, respectively.
RESULTS: BDE-99 was found to increase migration and invasion and trigger EMT in
HCT-116 cells; EMT was characterized by cells acquiring mesenchymal spindle-like 
morphology and by increased expression of N-cadherin with a concomitant decrease 
in E-cadherin. BDE-99 treatment also increased the protein and mRNA levels of the
transcription factor Snail, but not Slug, Twist, and ZEB1. Knockdown of Snail by 
siRNA significantly attenuated BDE-99-induced EMT in HCT-116 cells, suggesting
that Snail plays a crucial role in BDE-99-induced EMT. The PI3K/Akt inhibitor
LY294002 completely blocked BDE-99-induced Snail and invasion of HCT-116 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed that BDE-99 can trigger the EMT of colon cancer
cells via the PI3K/AKT/Snail signaling pathway. This study provides new insight
into the tumorigenesis and metastasis of CRC stimulated by BDE-99 and possibly
other PBDE congeners.

PMID: 25908029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(6):933-40. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1040959. Epub
2015 Apr 21.

EGFR inhibitors prevent induction of cancer stem-like cells in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma by suppressing epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Sato F(1), Kubota Y, Natsuizaka M, Maehara O, Hatanaka Y, Marukawa K, Terashita
K, Suda G, Ohnishi S, Shimizu Y, Komatsu Y, Ohashi S, Kagawa S, Kinugasa H,
Whelan KA, Nakagawa H, Sakamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology ; Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine ; Sapporo , Japan.

There exists a highly tumorigenic subset of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) cells defined by high expression of CD44. A novel therapy targeting these 
cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) is needed to improve prognosis of ESCC. CSCs of
ESCC have a mesenchymal phenotype and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is 
critical to enrich and maintain CSCs. EGFR, frequently overexpressed in ESCC, has
pivotal roles in EMT induced by TGF-ß in invasive fronts. Thus, EMT in invasive
fronts of ESCC might be important for CSCs and EGFR could be a target of a novel 
therapy eliminating CSCs. However, effects of EGFR inhibitors on CSCs in ESCC
have not been fully examined. EGFR inhibitors, erlotinib and cetuximab,
significantly suppressed enrichment of CSCs via TGF-ß1-mediated EMT. Importantly,
EGFR inhibitors sharply suppressed ZEB1 that is essential for EMT in ESCC.
Further, EGFR inhibitors activated Notch1 and Notch3, leading to squamous cell
differentiation. EGFR inhibition may suppress expression of ZEB1 and induce
differentiation, thereby blocking EMT-mediated enrichment of CSCs. In organotypic
3D culture, a form of human tissue engineering, tumor cells in invasive nests
showed high expression of CD44. Erlotinib significantly blocked invasion into the
matrix and CD44 high expressing CSCs were markedly suppressed by erlotinib in
organotypic 3D culture. In conclusion, EMT is a critical process for generation
of CSCs and the invasive front of ESCC, where EMT occurs, might form a CSC niche 
in ESCC. EGFR inhibitors could suppress EMT in invasive fronts and be one
therapeutic option targeting against generation of CSCs in ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4623069 [Available on 2016-04-21]
PMID: 25897987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;35(6):2169-80. doi: 10.1159/000374022. Epub 2015 Apr
7.

MiR-10b Directly Targets ZEB1 and PIK3CA to Curb Adenomyotic Epithelial Cell
Invasiveness via Upregulation of E-Cadherin and Inhibition of Akt
Phosphorylation.

Guo Y(1), Lang X, Lu Z, Wang J, Li T, Liao Y, Jia C, Zhao W, Fang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology, Shanghai Municipal Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine affiliated to Shanghai TCM University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Adenomyosis is a disease in which ectopic endometrial glands and
stromal cells appear in the uterine myometrium. Despite its prevalence, the
molecular mechanisms involved in the development of adenomyosis are largely
unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of miR-10b and its
target genes ZEB1 and PIK3CA in adenomyosis.
METHODS: 1387 miRNAs in human normal endometrium and ectopic endometrial lesions 
of adenomyosis using a microarray screen assay. The significant differential
expression of 10 miRNAs was confirmed by qRT-PCR. The expression of miR-10b in
endometrial epithelial cells isolated from normal endometrium and paired eutopic 
and ectopic endometrium of adenomyosis was measured by qRT-PCR. Subsequently, the
targets of miR-10b were predicted by bioinformatics and confirmed using a
luciferase assay, and the mRNA and protein expression of ZEB1 and PIK3CA were
assessed in the endometrium or endometrial epithelial cells by qRT-PCR and
western blotting or immunohistochemical analysis. Cell migration and cell
invasion of endometrial epithelial cells with different treatments by Transwell
assays. The expression of p-AKT, Akt and E-cadherin proteins was determined by
Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: MiR-10b expression was significantly downregulated in both adenomyotic
lesions and adenomyotic epithelial cells. MiR-10b overexpression in adenomyotic
epithelial cells inhibited cell migration and invasion. We then demonstrated that
miR-10b directly targets the 3'-UTRs of ZEB1 and PIK3CA, and downregulates ZEB1
and PIK3CA in adenomyotic epithelial cells, leading to increased E-cadherin
expression and decreased Akt phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-10b directly targets ZEB1 and PIK3CA to curb adenomyotic
epithelial cell invasiveness via upregulation of E-Cadherin and inhibition of Akt
phosphorylation.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25896413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Oncol. 2015;46(6):2639-48. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2964. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

The role of WWOX tumor suppressor gene in the regulation of EMT process via
regulation of CDH1-ZEB1-VIM expression in endometrial cancer.

Pluciennik E(1), Nowakowska M(1), Pospiech K(1), Stepien A(2), Wolkowicz M(3),
Galdyszynska M(4), Popeda M(4), Wójcik-Krowiranda K(5), Bienkiewicz A(5),
Bednarek AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Medical University of Lodz, PL 90-752 
Lodz, Poland. (2)Laboratory of Clinical and Transplant Immunology and Genetics,
Copernicus Memorial Hospital in Lodz, PL 90-752 Lodz, Poland. (3)Bio-Tech
Consulting Sp. z o.o, Faculty of Biomedical Science and Postgraduate Education,
Medical University of Lodz, PL 90-752 Lodz, Poland. (4)Faculty of Biomedical
Sciences and Postgraduate Education, Medical University of Lodz, PL 90-752 Lodz, 
Poland. (5)Clinical Division of Gynecological Oncology, Medical University of
Lodz, PL 90-752 Lodz, Poland.

This study defines the role of WWOX in the regulation of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition. A group of 164 endometrial adenocarcinoma patients was
studied as well as an ECC1 well-differentiated steroid-responsive endometrial
cell line, which was transducted with WWOX cDNA by a retroviral system. The
relationship between WWOX gene and EMT marker (CDH1, VIM, ZEB1, SNAI1) expression
on mRNA (RT-qPCR) and protein levels (western blotting) was evaluated. The EMT
processes were also analysed in vitro by adhesion of cells to extracellular
matrix proteins, migration through a basement membrane, anchorage-independent
growth and MMP activity assay. DNA microarrays (HumanOneArray) were used to
determine WWOX-dependent pathways in an ECC1 cell line. A positive correlation
was observed between WWOX and ZEB1, and a negative correlation between CDH1 and
VIM. WWOX expression was found to inversely correlate with the risk of recurrence
of tumors in patients. However, in the WWOX-expressing ECC1 cell line, WWOX
expression was found to be inversely related with VIM and positively with CDH1.
The ECC1/WWOX cell line variant demonstrated increased migratory capacity, with
increased expression of metalloproteinases MMP2/MMP9. However, these cells were
not able to form colonies in suspension and revealed decreased adhesion to
fibronectin and fibrinogen. Microarray analysis demonstrated that WWOX has an
impact on the variety of cellular pathways including the cadherin and integrin
signalling pathways. Our results suggest that the WWOX gene plays a role in the
regulation of EMT processes in endometrial cancer by controlling the expression
of proteins associated with cell motility, thus influencing tissue remodeling,
with the suppression of mesenchymal markers.

PMID: 25892250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Cancer. 2015 Apr 15;14:84. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0357-6.

ZEB1 transcriptionally regulated carbonic anhydrase 9 mediates the
chemoresistance of tongue cancer via maintaining intracellular pH.

Zheng G(1), Peng C(2), Jia X(3), Gu Y(4), Zhang Z(5), Deng Y(6), Wang C(7), Li
N(8), Yin J(9), Liu X(10), Lu M(11), Tang H(12), He Z(13).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. zhengguopei@126.com.
(2)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. 834252642@qq.com.
(3)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. jxt1231994@163.com.
(4)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. guyx189@163.com.
(5)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. zjiezhang@126.com.
(6)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. jxncdyg215@126.com.
(7)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. chareswck@163.com.
(8)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. Fionali0731@126.com.
(9)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University,
Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. yinjiang20@gmail.com. 
(10)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical
University, Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China.
smilenew@gmail.com. (11)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute of
Guangzhou Medical University, Hengzhigang Road 78#, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong,
China. 51315094@qq.com. (12)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University
Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, East Dongfeng Road 651#, Guangzhou,
510060, Guangdong, China. tanghl@sysucc.org.cn. (13)Cancer Hospital and Cancer
Research Institute of Guangzhou Medical University, Hengzhigang Road 78#,
Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China. hezhimin2005@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Chemoresistance is a major obstacle in successfully treating cancers,
and the mechanisms responsible for drug resistance are still far from understood.
Carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) has been shown to be upregulated in the drug-resistant
tongue cancer cell line Tca8113/PYM and to be associated with drug resistance.
However, the mechanisms regulating CA9 expression and its role in drug resistance
remain unclear.
METHODS: Bioinformatic and experimental analysis involving ChIP and luciferase
reporter assays were used to validate Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1)
as a transcriptional regulator of CA9. Gene expression and protein levels were
evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting, respectively. Sensitivity 
to chemotherapy was examined using the MTS assay and Hoechst staining and
analysis caspase-3 activity to evaluate changes in apoptosis. Intracellular pH
(pHi) was measured using fluorescent pH-indicator BCECF-AM. Protein expression in
patient tissue samples was examined by immunohistochemistry and survival of
tongue cancer patients from which these samples were derived was also analyzed.
RESULTS: ZEB1 bound to the promoter of CA9 to positively regulate CA9 expression 
in tongue cancer cells. Knockdown of CA9 using short interfering RNA (siRNA)
abolished the chemoresistance resulting from ZEB1 overexpression in Tca8113 and
SCC-25 cells, and CA9 overexpression attenuated chemosensitivity induced by ZEB1 
knockdown in Tca8113/PYM cells. CA9 knockdown also prevented maintenance of pHi
mediated by overexpression of ZEB1 in Tca8113 and SCC-25 cells following
chemotherapy, associated with increased apoptosis and caspase-3 activation.
Conversely, ectopic expression of CA9 suppressed decrease in pHi mediated by ZEB1
knockdown in Tca8113/PYM cells following chemotherapy, accompanied by decreased
apoptosis and caspase-3 activation. Importantly, a positive correlation was
observed between ZEB1 and CA9 protein expression in tongue cancer tissues, and
expression of these proteins associated with a poor prognosis for patients.
CONCLUSION: Our finding that tumor cells regulate pHi in response to chemotherapy
provides new insights into mechanisms of drug resistance during cancer treatment.
Identification of the ZEB1-CA9 signaling axis as a biomarker of poor prognosis in
tongue cancer will be valuable in future development of therapeutic strategies
aimed at improving treatment efficacy, especially in terms of drug resistance
associated with this disease.

PMCID: PMC4404088
PMID: 25890268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015 Mar 22;17:76. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0590-9.

CD4 T-cell transcriptome analysis reveals aberrant regulation of STAT3 and Wnt
signaling pathways in rheumatoid arthritis: evidence from a case-control study.

Ye H(1), Zhang J(2), Wang J(3), Gao Y(4), Du Y(5), Li C(6), Deng M(7), Guo J(8), 
Li Z(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's
Hospital, 11 South Xizhimen Street, Beijing, 100044, China. yehbmu@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's
Hospital, 11 South Xizhimen Street, Beijing, 100044, China.
zhangjing1002@126.com. (3)School of Mathematical Sciences, Center for
Quantitative Biology, Peking University, 136 North Zhong-guan-cun Street,
Beijing, 100871, China. junwangcqb@pku.edu.cn. (4)Department of Rheumatology and 
Immunology, Peking University People's Hospital, 11 South Xizhimen Street,
Beijing, 100044, China. gaoyanyan_123@yeah.net. (5)Department of Rheumatology and
Immunology, Peking University People's Hospital, 11 South Xizhimen Street,
Beijing, 100044, China. sdtaduyan1115@163.com. (6)Department of Rheumatology and 
Immunology, Peking University People's Hospital, 11 South Xizhimen Street,
Beijing, 100044, China. fiona_leechun@163.com. (7)School of Mathematical
Sciences, Center for Quantitative Biology, Peking University, 136 North
Zhong-guan-cun Street, Beijing, 100871, China. dengmh@pku.edu.cn. (8)Department
of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's Hospital, 11 South
Xizhimen Street, Beijing, 100044, China. jpguo99@gmail.com. (9)Department of
Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's Hospital, 11 South
Xizhimen Street, Beijing, 100044, China. li99@bjmu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease in which
T cells play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis. Knowledge in terms of the CD4
T-cell transcriptome in RA is limited. The aim of this study was to examine the
whole-genome transcription profile of CD4 T cells in RA by comparing patients
with RA to healthy controls.
METHODS: Peripheral blood CD4 T cells were isolated from 53 RA patients with
active disease and 45 healthy individuals; 13 cases and 10 controls were enrolled
in microarray analysis. The remaining 40 cases and 35 controls were recruited as 
an independent cohort for the validation study. Bioinformatics was performed on
Gene Ontology (GO), gene-gene interaction networks, and pathway analysis. The
gene modules, by combining the results from GO, gene networks, and pathway
analysis, were selected for further validation.
RESULTS: The CD4 T cells showed 1,496 differentially expressed (DE) genes in RA
patients relative to healthy individuals. GO analysis revealed that the DE genes 
were enriched in immune response, T-cell response, apoptosis process, and Wnt
receptor signaling. Pathway analysis also identified that 'Wnt signaling pathway'
was differentially regulated between two groups (P=2.78×10(-10)). By gene-gene
network analysis, we found that the DE genes were enriched in T-cell receptor
(TCR), JAK-STAT signaling, and Wnt signaling pathway. By gene module analysis, we
found that a number of DE genes overlapped in the three different analyses. In
total, 23 genes were selected for further validation, and nine genes were
confirmed. Of these, four genes (SOCS3, CBL, IFNAR1, and PIK3CA) were involved in
STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) signaling, and three
genes (CBL, KLF9, and CSNK2A1) were involved in the Wnt signaling pathway.
Additionally, several zinc finger transcription factors (ZEB1, ZNF292, and
ZNF644) were confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: We report here the first case-control study of the CD4 T-cell
transcriptome profile in RA. Our data provide evidence that CD4 T cells from
patients with RA have abnormal functional networks in STAT3 signaling and Wnt
signaling. Our results also suggest that the aberrant expression of several zinc 
finger transcription factors (ZEB1, ZNF292, and ZNF644) may be potential
pathogenic factors for RA.

PMCID: PMC4392874
PMID: 25880754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. BMC Mol Biol. 2015 Mar 19;16:8. doi: 10.1186/s12867-015-0038-4.

An Rb1-dependent amplification loop between Ets1 and Zeb1 is evident in thymocyte
differentiation and invasive lung adenocarcinoma.

Dean KC(1), Huang L(2,)(3), Chen Y(4,)(5), Lu X(6), Liu Y(7,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville
Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd., Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
kcdean2442@gmail.com. (2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd.,
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. lihuang@zju.edu.cn. (3)College of Agriculture and
Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, 310058, China.
lihuang@zju.edu.cn. (4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd.,
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. sandytur22@gmail.com. (5)The Second Affiliated
Hospital, Central South University Xiangya School of Medicine, Changsha, Hunan
Province, 410011, China. sandytur22@gmail.com. (6)Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad
Ali Blvd., Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. xiaoqin.lu@louisville.edu. (7)Department
of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences
Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Blvd., Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
y0liu016@louisville.edu. (8)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
y0liu016@louisville.edu. (9)Birth Defects Center, University of Louisville Health
Sciences Center, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. y0liu016@louisville.edu.

BACKGROUND: Ras pathway mutation leads to induction and Erk phosphorylation and
activation of the Ets1 transcription factor. Ets1 in turn induces cyclin E and
cyclin dependent kinase (cdk) 2 to drive cell cycle progression. Ets1 also
induces expression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) transcription
factor Zeb1, and thereby links Ras mutation to EMT, which is thought to drive
tumor invasion. Ras pathway mutations are detected by the Rb1 tumor suppression
pathway, and mutation or inactivation of the Rb1 pathway is required for EMT.
RESULTS: We examined linkage between Rb1, Ets1 and Zeb1. We found that an Rb1-E2F
complex binds the Ets1 promoter and constitutively limits Ets1 expression. But,
Rb1 repression of Zeb1 provides the major impact of Rb1 on Ets1 expression. We
link Rb1 repression of Zeb1 to induction of miR-200 family members, which in turn
target Ets1 mRNA. These findings suggest that Ets1 and Zeb1 comprise an
amplification loop that is dependent upon miR-200 and regulated by Rb1. Thus,
induction of Ets1 when the Rb1 pathway is lost may contribute to deregulated cell
cycle progression through Ets1 induction of cyclin E and cdk2. Consistent with
such an amplification loop, we correlate expression of Ets1 and Zeb1 in mouse and
human lung adenocarcinoma. In addition we demonstrate that Ets1 expression in
thymocytes is also dependent upon Zeb1.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results provide evidence of an Rb1-dependent
Ets1-Zeb1 amplification loop in thymocyte differentiation and tumor invasion.

PMCID: PMC4364651
PMID: 25880398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 29;290(22):13812-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.653261. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

Autocrine/Paracrine Human Growth Hormone-stimulated MicroRNA 96-182-183 Cluster
Promotes Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition and Invasion in Breast Cancer.

Zhang W(1), Qian P(2), Zhang X(2), Zhang M(1), Wang H(2), Wu M(2), Kong X(2), Tan
S(2), Ding K(2), Perry JK(3), Wu Z(4), Cao Y(5), Lobie PE(6), Zhu T(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of 
Life Sciences and Medical Center, University of Science and Technology of China, 
Hefei, Anhui 230027, China, the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences
at Microscale, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China. (2)From the CAS Key Laboratory of
Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and Medical Center, 
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China. (3)the
Liggins Institute and Maurice Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery,
University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand. (4)From the CAS Key
Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and
Medical Center, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230027, China, the Department of Pathology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei,
Anhui 230027, China, and. (5)the Department of Pathology, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China, and. (6)the Cancer Science Institute of
Singapore and Department of Pharmacology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 117599, Singapore csipel@nus.edu.sg. (7)From the CAS Key Laboratory of 
Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and Medical Center, 
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China, the
Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Hefei, Anhui
230027, China, zhut@ustc.edu.cn.

Human growth hormone (hGH) plays critical roles in pubertal mammary gland growth,
development, and sexual maturation. Accumulated studies have reported that
autocrine/paracrine hGH is an orthotopically expressed oncoprotein that promotes 
normal mammary epithelial cell oncogenic transformation. Autocrine/paracrine hGH 
has also been reported to promote mammary epithelial cell epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) and invasion. However, the underlying mechanism remains largely 
obscure. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are reported to be involved in regulation of multiple
cellular functions of cancer. To determine whether autocrine/paracrine hGH
promotes EMT and invasion through modulation of miRNA expression, we performed
microarray profiling using MCF-7 cells stably expressing wild type or a
translation-deficient hGH gene and identified miR-96-182-183 as an
autocrine/paracrine hGH-regulated miRNA cluster. Forced expression of
miR-96-182-183 conferred on epithelioid MCF-7 cells a mesenchymal phenotype and
promoted invasive behavior in vitro and dissemination in vivo. Moreover, we
observed that miR-96-182-183 promoted EMT and invasion by directly and
simultaneously suppressing BRMS1L (breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1-like)
gene expression. miR-96 and miR-182 also targeted GHR, providing a potential
negative feedback loop in the hGH-GHR signaling pathway. We further demonstrated 
that autocrine/paracrine hGH stimulated miR-96-182-183 expression and facilitated
EMT and invasion via STAT3 and STAT5 signaling. Consistent with elevated
expression of autocrine/paracrine hGH in metastatic breast cancer tissue,
miR-96-182-183 expression was also remarkably enhanced. Hence, we delineate the
roles of the miRNA-96-182-183 cluster and elucidate a novel
hGH-GHR-STAT3/STAT5-miR-96-182-183-BRMS1L-ZEB1/E47-EMT/invasion axis, which
provides further understanding of the mechanism of autocrine/paracrine
hGH-stimulated EMT and invasion in breast cancer.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4447958 [Available on 2016-05-29]
PMID: 25873390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Apr 14;7(6):831-47. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404396.

ZEB1-associated drug resistance in cancer cells is reversed by the class I HDAC
inhibitor mocetinostat.

Meidhof S(1), Brabletz S(2), Lehmann W(3), Preca BT(3), Mock K(3), Ruh M(2),
Schüler J(4), Berthold M(5), Weber A(5), Burk U(5), Lübbert M(6), Puhr M(7),
Culig Z(7), Wellner U(8), Keck T(8), Bronsert P(9), Küsters S(5), Hopt UT(5),
Stemmler MP(2), Brabletz T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg Medical
Center, Freiburg, Germany Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM),
Albert Ludwigs University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany Faculty of Biology, Albert 
Ludwigs University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Experimental Medicine I,
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, FAU University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (3)Department of General and Visceral
Surgery, University of Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany Faculty of
Biology, Albert Ludwigs University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (4)Oncotest GmbH,
Institute for Experimental Oncology, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of General 
and Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Freiburg Medical Center, 
Freiburg, Germany German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Freiburg and German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Division of Experimental Urology,
Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. (8)Department of Surgery,
University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Germany.
(9)Tumorbank Comprehensive Cancer Center Freiburg and Institute of Surgical
Pathology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(10)Experimental Medicine I, Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, FAU
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
Freiburg and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
thomas.brabletz@fau.de.

Therapy resistance is a major clinical problem in cancer medicine and crucial for
disease relapse and progression. Therefore, the clinical need to overcome it,
particularly for aggressive tumors such as pancreatic cancer, is very high.
Aberrant activation of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and an
associated cancer stem cell phenotype are considered a major cause of therapy
resistance. Particularly, the EMT-activator ZEB1 was shown to confer stemness and
resistance. We applied a systematic, stepwise strategy to interfere with ZEB1
function, aiming to overcome drug resistance. This led to the identification of
both its target gene miR-203 as a major drug sensitizer and subsequently the
class I HDAC inhibitor mocetinostat as epigenetic drug to interfere with ZEB1
function, restore miR-203 expression, repress stemness properties, and induce
sensitivity against chemotherapy. Thereby, mocetinostat turned out to be more
effective than other HDAC inhibitors, such as SAHA, indicating the relevance of
the screening strategy. Our data encourage the application of mechanism-based
combinations of selected epigenetic drugs with standard chemotherapy for the
rational treatment of aggressive solid tumors, such as pancreatic cancer.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4459821
PMID: 25872941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11652-63.

LncRNA-ATB promotes trastuzumab resistance and invasion-metastasis cascade in
breast cancer.

Shi SJ(1), Wang LJ(2), Yu B(1), Li YH(1), Jin Y(1), Bai XZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Administration and Department of Aristogenesis, No. 202 Hospital
of PLA, No. 5, Shenyang, 110003, Liaoning Province, P.R. China. (2)Department of 
Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi Province, P.R. China.

Trastuzumab resistance is leading cause of mortality in HER2-positive breast
cancers, and the role of TGF-ß-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
trastuzumab resistance is well established, but the involvement of lncRNAs in
trastuzumab resistance is still unknown. Here, we generated trastuzumab-resistant
breast cancer cells with increased invasiveness compared with parental cells, and
observed robust epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and consistently elevated
TGF-ß signaling in these cells. We identified long noncoding RNA activated by
TGF-ß (lnc-ATB) was the most remarkably upregulated lncRNA in TR SKBR-3 cells and
the tissues of TR breast cancer patients. We found that lnc-ATB could promote
trastuzumab resistance and invasion-metastasis cascade in breast cancer by
competitively biding miR-200c, up-regulating ZEB1 and ZNF-217, and then inducing 
EMT. In addition, we also found that the high level of lnc-ATB was correlated
with trastuzumab resistance of breast cancer patients. Thus, these findings
suggest that lncRNA-ATB, a mediator of TGF-ß signaling, could predispose breast
cancer patients to EMT and trastuzumab resistance.

PMCID: PMC4484483
PMID: 25871474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 30;6(12):10350-65.

Salinomycin decreases doxorubicin resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma cells by
inhibiting the ß-catenin/TCF complex association via FOXO3a activation.

Zhou Y(1), Liang C(1), Xue F(2), Chen W(1), Zhi X(1), Feng X(3), Bai X(1), Liang 
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The Second Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, People's Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, School of Medicine, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, PR
China. (3)Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling
Network, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China.

Doxorubicin is a conventional and effective chemotherapy drug against
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, during long-term doxorubicin
monotherapy, HCC cells may eventually develop acquired-resistance to doxorubicin 
which results in recurrence and a poor prognosis. Salinomycin, an ionophore
antibiotic, was recently reported to selectively kill human cancer stem cells
(CSCs) which were response for chemoresistance. In this study, salinomycin was
found to exert synergistic cytotoxicity with doxorubicin in HCC cells and be
capable of inhibiting doxorubicin-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), an important cellular process involved in the acquired chemoresistance of 
tumors. Further experiments revealed that FOXO3a, a multifunctional transcription
factor that can be activated by salinomycin, was vital in mediating
doxorubicin-induced EMT. In addition, activated FOXO3a disturbed the interaction 
between ß-catenin and TCF and inhibited the expression of ß-catenin/TCF target
genes (ZEB1, c-Myc and CyclinD1), which played important roles in
doxorubicin-induced EMT in HCC cells. Finally, the enhanced curative efficacy of 
combination treatment of doxorubicin and salinomycin for HCC was confirmed in
established xenograft models. In summary, the present study identifies a new
doxorubicin-based chemotherapy for advanced HCC and provides a potential
anti-cancer strategy targeting FOXO3a and related cell pathway molecules.

PMCID: PMC4496360
PMID: 25871400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 30;6(12):9834-53.

Cordycepin (3'-deoxyadenosine) suppressed HMGA2, Twist1 and ZEB1-dependent
melanoma invasion and metastasis by targeting miR-33b.

Zhang P(1,)(2), Huang C(3,)(4), Fu C(2), Tian Y(3,)(5), Hu Y(6), Wang B(7),
Strasner A(8), Song Y(1), Song E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Real-Time Analytical Chemistry (Southwest
University), Ministry of Education, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southwest
University, Chongqing 400715, China. (2)Department of Bioengineering,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16801, USA. (3)Institute of
Pathology, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.
(4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA. (6)Rollins School of Public Health, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (7)College of Bioengineering, Chongqing
University, Chongqing 400030, China. (8)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

Malignant melanoma, the most deadly form of skin cancer, has a high propensity
for metastatic spread and is notoriously chemotherapy-resistant. Cordycepin, the 
active component of Cordyceps spp., has been identified to have anti-metastatic
effect on tumor progression and thus possesses pharmacological and therapeutic
potentials. However, the mechanisms of anti-metastatic effects of cordycepin at
cellular levels remain elusive. We analyzed the effect of cordycepin on human
melanoma miRNA expression profiles by miRNAarray and found that miR-33b was
upregulated in highly-metastatic melanoma cell lines following cordycepin
exposure. Cordycepin-mediated miR-33b expression was dependent on LXR-RXR
heterodimer activation. miR-33b directly binds to HMGA2, Twist1 and ZEB1 3'-UTR
to suppress their expression. The negative correlations between miR-33b levels
and HMGA2, Twist1 or ZEB1 expression were detected in 72 patient melanoma tissue 
samples. By targeting HMGA2 and Twist1, miR-33b attenuated melanoma migration and
invasiveness upon cordycepin exposure. miR-33b knockdown or ZEB1 overexpression
reverted cordycepin-mediated mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), triggering 
the expression of N-cadherin. In spontaneous metastasis models, cordycepin
suppressed tumor metastasis without altering primary tumor growth. We showed for 
the first time that targeting miRNA by cordycepin indicates a new mechanism of
cordycepin-induced suppression of tumor metastasis and miR-33b/HMGA2/Twist1/ZEB1 
axis plays critical roles in regulating melanoma dissemination.

PMCID: PMC4496401
PMID: 25868853  [PubMed - in process]


215. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):7035-43. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3414-2. Epub 2015
Apr 13.

C-reactive protein inhibits expression of N-cadherin and ZEB-1 in murine colon
adenocarcinoma.

Kudo S(1), Saito H(2), Motoyama S(2), Sasaki T(2), Imai K(2), Konno H(2),
Takashima S(2), Atari M(2), Sato Y(2), Minamiya Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Akita University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Hondo, Akita City, 010-8543, Japan.
sevenstarsgitanes12@yahoo.co.jp. (2)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic
Surgery, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Hondo, Akita City,
010-8543, Japan.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is thought to play a key role in
cancer cell invasion and metastasis. We previously demonstrated that cancer cell 
migration is inhibited by C-reactive protein (CRP), which is widely used as a
biomarker of inflammation, though its functions are not fully understood. In the 
present study, we evaluated the effect of CRP on cancer cell migration and
expression of mesenchymal and epithelial markers of EMT and of related
transcription factors. MCA-38 murine colon adenocarcinoma cells were
subcutaneously inoculated into the backs of C57BL/6 mice, which also received 1
µg of recombinant mouse CRP or vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline) subcutaneously
every 3 days for 4 weeks. Thereafter, the mice were sacrificed for evaluation
using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
immunohistochemistry. There was no statistical difference in tumor size between
the control and CRP groups, but CRP dose-dependently inhibited MCA-38 cell
migration. PCR analysis confirmed that CRP suppresses expression of N-cadherin
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), a mesenchymal marker of EMT, and ZEB-1, an EMT-related transcription 
factor (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). These findings suggest that CRP inhibits EMT in a MCA-38
tumor-bearing mouse model. CRP may thus be a potentially useful tool for
preventing cancer progression through suppression of EMT.

PMID: 25864110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cancer Sci. 2015 Jun;106(6):718-25. doi: 10.1111/cas.12668. Epub 2015 May 8.

Persistent activation of STAT3 by PIM2-driven positive feedback loop for
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer.

Uddin N(1), Kim RK(1), Yoo KC(1), Kim YH(1), Cui YH(1), Kim IG(2), Suh Y(1), Lee 
SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Radiation Biology, Environmental
Radiation Research Group, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Daejeon, Korea.

Metastasis of breast cancer is promoted by epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Emerging evidence suggests that STAT3 is a critical signaling node in EMT 
and is constitutively activated in many carcinomas, including breast cancer.
However, its signaling mechanisms underlying persistent activation of STAT3
associated with EMT remain obscure. Here, we report that PIM2 promotes activation
of STAT3 through induction of cytokines. Activation of STAT3 caused an increase
in PIM2 expression, implicating a positive feedback loop between PIM2 and STAT3. 
In agreement, targeting of either PIM2, STAT3 or PIM2-dependent cytokines
suppressed EMT-associated migratory and invasive properties through inhibition of
ZEB1. Taken together, our findings identify the signaling mechanisms underlying
the persistent activation of STAT3 and the oncogenic role of PIM2 in EMT in
breast cancer.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4471798
PMID: 25854938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 22;17:25. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0527-x.

Inhibition of iNOS as a novel effective targeted therapy against triple-negative 
breast cancer.

Granados-Principal S, Liu Y, Guevara ML, Blanco E, Choi DS, Qian W, Patel T,
Rodriguez AA, Cusimano J, Weiss HL, Zhao H, Landis MD, Dave B, Gross SS, Chang
JC.

INTRODUCTION: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of
breast cancer with no effective targeted therapy. Inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) is associated with poor survival in patients with breast cancer by
increasing tumor aggressiveness. This work aimed to investigate the potential of 
iNOS inhibitors as a targeted therapy for TNBC. We hypothesized that inhibition
of endogenous iNOS would decrease TNBC aggressiveness by reducing tumor
initiation and metastasis through modulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-inducing factors.
METHODS: iNOS protein levels were determined in 83 human TNBC tissues and
correlated with clinical outcome. Proliferation, mammosphere-forming efficiency, 
migration, and EMT transcription factors were assessed in vitro after iNOS
inhibition. Endogenous iNOS targeting was evaluated as a potential therapy in
TNBC mouse models.
RESULTS: High endogenous iNOS expression was associated with worse prognosis in
patients with TNBC by gene expression as well as immunohistochemical analysis.
Selective iNOS (1400 W) and pan-NOS (L-NMMA and L-NAME) inhibitors diminished
cell proliferation, cancer stem cell self-renewal, and cell migration in vitro,
together with inhibition of EMT transcription factors (Snail, Slug, Twist1, and
Zeb1). Impairment of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a, endoplasmic reticulum stress
(IRE1a/XBP1), and the crosstalk between activating transcription factor
3/activating transcription factor 4 and transforming growth factor ß was
observed. iNOS inhibition significantly reduced tumor growth, the number of lung 
metastases, tumor initiation, and self-renewal.
CONCLUSIONS: Considering the effectiveness of L-NMMA in decreasing tumor growth
and enhancing survival rate in TNBC, we propose a targeted therapeutic clinical
trial by re-purposing the pan-NOS inhibitor L-NMMA, which has been extensively
investigated for cardiogenic shock as an anti-cancer therapeutic.

PMCID: PMC4384389
PMID: 25849745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Oncol. 2015;46(6):2431-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2947. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

High-mobility-group A2 overexpression provokes a poor prognosis of gastric cancer
through the epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Lee J(1), Ha S(1), Jung CK(2), Lee HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Department of Surgery, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Tumor metastases are the ultimate target in cancer therapy. In epithelial
malignancies, the expression of high-mobility-group A2 (HMGA2) is associated with
disease progression and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is
involved in the metastatic process. The present study assessed the clinical and
molecular effects of HMGA2 with the malignant tissues of 170 patients with
gastric cancer and gastric cancer cells expressing HMGA2. HMGA2 expression was
determined using immunohistochemistry and analyzed with respect to the
clinicopathological data of patients with this tumor. In the gastric cancer cell 
line MKN28, in which HMGA2 was knocked down by two different short-hairpin RNAs, 
Transwell migration and invasion assays were conducted and western blotting was
used to detect the altered expression of EMT markers. In patients with gastric
cancer, HMGA2 overexpression correlated with tumor progression and was indicative
of a significantly worse overall survival. Migration and invasion assays using
HMGA2-knocked down MKN28 cells showed a reduction in cell migration and invasion.
The upregulation of E-cadherin, an epithelial marker, and the downregulation of
N-cadherin, a mesenchymal marker were observed in HMGA2-knocked down cells. In
addition, expression of the transcriptional factors Snail and Zeb1 and of the
EMT-pathway molecule ß-catenin were decreased. HMGA2 overexpression, through its 
relationship to EMT, thus seems to aggravate invasion and metastasis in gastric
cancer. It may therefore serve as a predictive marker in determining the clinical
outcome of patients with gastric cancer and offer a promising therapeutic target.

PMID: 25845850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Apr 2;6:e1708. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.74.

Negative feedback loop between p66Shc and ZEB1 regulates fibrotic EMT response in
lung cancer cells.

Li X(1), Gao D(2), Wang H(1), Li X(3), Yang J(2), Yan X(2), Liu Z(4), Ma Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Immunology, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for
Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China [2] Laboratory of Epigenetics and
Tumorigenesis, Tianjin Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin 300070, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 2011 Collaborative
Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Systems
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), School of Chemical Engineering and
Technology, Tianjin University, 92 Weijin Road, Nankai District, Tianjin 300072, 
China. (4)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Immunology, School
of Basic Medical Sciences, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for
Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China [2] Laboratory of Epigenetics and
Tumorigenesis, Tianjin Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin 300070, China [3] Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment
and Disease (Ministry of Education), Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, 
China [4] Key Laboratory of Hormones and Development (Ministry of Health),
Metabolic Diseases Hospital, Tianjin Institute of Endocrinology, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin 300070, China. (5)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 2011 Collaborative
Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China [2] Key
Laboratory of Hormones and Development (Ministry of Health), Metabolic Diseases
Hospital, Tianjin Institute of Endocrinology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin
300070, China.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program is crucial for the
epithelial cancer progression and fibrotic diseases. Our previous work has
demonstrated that p66Shc, a focal adhesion-associated adaptor protein, is
frequently downregulated in lung cancers and its depletion promotes metastasis
behavior through anoikis resistance. However, mechanism underlying loss of p66Shc
and EMT response is not fully understood. Here, we showed that p66Shc deficiency 
enhanced the expression of ZEB1, the known mesenchymal transcription factor and
consequently increased Vimentin, and decreased epithelial markers of E-cadherin
and ß-catenin. p66Shc depletion also increased cell invasion and migration. In
addition, ChIP and luciferase assays showed that these effects were directly
mediated by ZEB1 repression of p66Shc promoter. Thus, our findings define a
critical role of p66Shc in the suppression of fibrotic EMT response with a
negative feedback loop between p66Shc and ZEB1 in lung epithelial cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4650543
PMID: 25837484  [PubMed - in process]


220. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):6741-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3372-8. Epub 2015 Apr
3.

miR-139-5p suppresses cancer cell migration and invasion through targeting ZEB1
and ZEB2 in GBM.

Yue S(1), Wang L(1), Zhang H(1), Min Y(1), Lou Y(1), Sun H(1), Jiang Y(1), Zhang 
W(1), Liang A(1), Guo Y(1), Chen P(1), Lv G(1), Wang L(1), Zong Q(1), Li Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhengzhou Central Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou Central Hospital, 195 Tongbai Road, Zhongyuan District,
Zhengzhou, Henan, 450000, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhengzhou Central
Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou Central Hospital, 195
Tongbai Road, Zhongyuan District, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450000, China.
2238430347@qq.com.

Invasion and migration of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a multistep process
and an important phenotype that causes this disease to invade surrounding tissues
in the brain. Recent studies have highlighted that miRNAs play a pivotal role in 
controlling GBM cell plasticity. In this report, we used wound healing and
transwell assays to identify a novel role of miR-139-5p in inhibition of GBM cell
migration and invasion. Bioinformatics coupled with luciferase and Western blot
assays also revealed that miR-139-5p inhibited expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2, which
are master regulators of tumor metastasis. MiR-139-5p specifically interacts with
the 3'-UTR regions of ZEB1 and ZEB2, attenuating their expression in GBM cells.
To corroborate this finding, we rescued ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression and found
partial but significant increases in miR-139-5p-suppressed invasion of GBM cells.
The biological relevance of our study was validated by analyzing levels of
miR-139-5p in GBM tissue. We found that its expression significantly
downregulated compared to normal tissue and shorter overall survival rates in
patients with lower miR-139-5p expression. These results confirm that miR-139-5p 
suppresses GBM migration and invasion and highlight its potential as a biomarker 
and therapeutic target for treating GBM.

PMID: 25833697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jul 1;24(13):3689-98. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv113. Epub 2015 Apr 
1.

Loss of miR-200 family in 5-fluorouracil resistant colon cancer drives
lymphendothelial invasiveness in vitro.

Senfter D(1), Holzner S(1), Kalipciyan M(2), Staribacher A(2), Walzl A(3),
Huttary N(1), Krieger S(1), Brenner S(4), Jäger W(4), Krupitza G(1), Dolznig
H(3), Mader RM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pathology and. (2)Department of Medicine I,
Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna,
Austria. (3)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, 1090
Vienna, Austria and. (4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Diagnostics,
University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (5)Department of Medicine I,
Comprehensive Cancer Center of the Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna,
Austria, robert.mader@meduniwien.ac.at.

Invasive colorectal cancer is associated with poor prognosis requiring treatment 
with systemic chemotherapies usually including 5-fluorouracil. A consequence of
prolonged treatment is the acquisition of resistance eventually resulting in the 
recurrence of highly metastatic cancer cells. To address the relationship between
drug resistance and increased lymphatic metastatic potential, we used a 3D
co-culture model of colon tumour cell spheroids of parent CCL227 cells and
subclones with gradually increasing resistance against 5-fluorouracil. From each 
investigated cell line, homogeneous tumour spheroids were generated in the
presence of methylcellulose yielding emboli of ~700 µm diameter. When invasive,
tumour spheroids disrupt the continuous lymphendothelial cell (LEC) layer and
generate a 'circular chemorepellent-induced defect' (CCID), reminiscent of the
entry gates through which tumour emboli intravasate lymphatic vasculature. Here
we provide evidence that increasingly chemoresistant colon cancer spheroids were 
strongly associated with enhanced intravasative properties. In naïve CCL227
spheroids, miR-200 family members were released into exosomes thereby repressing 
the epithelial to mesenchymal transition-regulating transcription factors ZEB1
and SLUG in LEC. As a consequence of attenuated plasticity and migration of LEC, 
CCID formation was impaired. Loss of exosomal transferred miR-200c in resistant
colon cells rendered LEC more susceptible to pro-migratory signals that were
generated and directly transmitted by colon cancer spheroids. This observation
indicates a common molecular axis in colon cancer and LEC where miR-200 family
members act as regulators of ZEB proteins. The data support the notion that
horizontal miR-200 signalling prevents the permeation of cells into adjacent
epithelia and contributes to organ integrity.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25832648  [PubMed - in process]


222. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 1;10(4):e0122179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122179.
eCollection 2015.

Stanniocalicin 2 suppresses breast cancer cell migration and invasion via the
PKC/claudin-1-mediated signaling.

Hou J(1), Wang Z(2), Xu H(3), Yang L(2), Yu X(4), Yang Z(4), Deng Y(2), Meng
J(2), Feng Y(4), Guo X(4), Yang G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center;
Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China; Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center; Department of
Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (2)Cancer 
Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center; Department of Oncology,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (3)Breast surgery,
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, 
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (5)Cancer Institute, Fudan University
Shanghai Cancer Center; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China; Central Laboratory, The Fifth People's Hospital of
Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Stanniocalcin (STC), a glycoprotein hormone, is expressed in a wide variety of
tissues to regulate Ca2+ and PO4- homeostasis. STC2, a member of STC family, has 
been reported to be associated with tumor development. In this study, we
investigated whether the expression of STC2 is associated with migration and
invasion of breast cancer cells. We found that breast cancer cell line 231 HM
transfected with STC2 shRNA displayed high motility, fibroblast morphology, and
enhanced cell migration and invasion. Introduction of STC2 in 231 cells reduced
cell migration and invasion. In response to irradiation, silencing of STC2 in 231
HM cells reduced apoptosis, whereas overexpression of STC2 in 231 cells promoted 
apoptosis, compared with in control cells. Mechanistic study showed that STC2
negatively regulated PKC to control the expression of Claudin-1, which
subsequently induced the expressions of EMT-related factors including ZEB1, ZO-1,
Slug, Twist, and MMP9. Suppression of PKC activity by using a PKC inhibitor (Go
6983) restored the normal motility of STC2-silenced cells. Furthermore, in vivo
animal assay showed that STC2 inhibited tumorigenesis and metastasis of breast
cancer cells. Collectively, these results indicate that STC2 may inhibit EMT at
least partially through the PKC/Claudin-1-mediated signaling in human breast
cancer cells. Thus, STC2 may be exploited as a biomarker for metastasis and
targeted therapy in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4382185
PMID: 25830567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(6):2473-81.

Dendrosomal curcumin inhibits metastatic potential of human SW480 colon cancer
cells through Down-regulation of Claudin1, Zeb1 and Hef1-1 gene expression.

Dehghan Esmatabadi MJ(1), Farhangi B, Safari Z, Kazerooni H, Shirzad H, Zolghadr 
F, Sadeghizadeh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran E-mail : sadeghma@modares.ac.ir, zolghadr@modares.ac.ir.

Colon cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-associated death worldwide.
The prognosis for advanced colorectal cancers remains dismal, mainly due to the
propensity for metastatic progression. Accordingly, there is a need for effective
anti-metastasis therapeutic agents. Since a great body of research has indicated 
anticancer effects for curcumin, we investigated the effects of dendrosomal
curcumin (DNC) on cellular migration and adhesion of human SW480 cells and
possible molecular mechanisms involved. Different methods were applied in this
study including MTT, Scratch and adhesion assays as well as real-time PCR and
transwell chamber assays. Based on the results obtained, DNC inhibits metastasis 
by decreasing Hef 1, Zeb 1 and Claudin 1 mRNA levels and can reduce SW480 cell
proliferation with IC50values of 15.9, 11.6 and 7.64 µM at 24, 48 and 72 h
post-treatment. Thus it might be considered as a safe formulation for therapeutic
purpose in colorectal cancer cases.

PMID: 25824783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):8271-85.

A novel HIF-1a-integrin-linked kinase regulatory loop that facilitates
hypoxia-induced HIF-1a expression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer
cells.

Chou CC(1), Chuang HC(1), Salunke SB(1), Kulp SK(1), Chen CS(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy and Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. (2)Institute of
Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Here, we described a novel regulatory feedback loop in which hypoxia induces
integrin-linked kinase (ILK) expression through a HIF-1a-dependent mechanism and 
ILK, in turn, stimulates HIF-1a expression through cell type- and cell
context-dependent pathways. HIF-1a increased ILK via transcriptional activation. 
ILK increased HIF-1a levels by promoting mTOR-mediated translation in PC-3 and
MCF-7 cells, and by blocking GSK3ß-mediated degradation in LNCaP cells,
consistent with the cell line-/cellular context-specific functions of ILK as a
Ser473-Akt kinase. We show that ILK can account for the effects of hypoxia on
Akt, mTOR, and GSK3ß phosphorylation. Also, ILK can de-repress HIF-1a signaling
through the YB-1-mediated inhibition of Foxo3a expression. In concert with
HIF-1a, these downstream effectors promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) through modulation of Snail and Zeb1. Thus, the ILK-HIF-1a regulatory loop 
could underlie the maintenance of high HIF-1a expression levels and the promotion
of EMT under hypoxic conditions. Finally, we show that the small-molecule ILK
inhibitor T315 can disrupt this regulatory loop in vivo and suppress xenograft
tumor growth, thereby providing proof-of-concept that targeting ILK represents an
effective strategy to block HIF-1a expression and aggressive phenotype in cancer 
cells.

PMCID: PMC4480751
PMID: 25821081  [PubMed - in process]


225. Cell Rep. 2015 Apr 7;11(1):111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.03.002. Epub 2015
Mar 26.

The Rab2A GTPase promotes breast cancer stem cells and tumorigenesis via Erk
signaling activation.

Luo ML(1), Gong C(2), Chen CH(3), Hu H(3), Huang P(3), Zheng M(4), Yao Y(1), Wei 
S(3), Wulf G(3), Lieberman J(5), Zhou XZ(3), Song E(2), Lu KP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Breast Tumor
Center, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, 
China. (2)Breast Tumor Center, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou 510120, China. (3)Department of Medicine and Cancer
Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. (4)Department of Medicine and Cancer Research Institute,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Institute for Translational Medicine, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou
350108, China. (5)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)Department of
Medicine and Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Institute for Translational
Medicine, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350108, China. Electronic address:
klu@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Proline-directed phosphorylation is regulated by the prolyl isomerase Pin1, which
plays a fundamental role in driving breast cancer stem-like cells (BCSCs). Rab2A 
is a small GTPase critical for vesicle trafficking. Here, we show that Pin1
increases Rab2A transcription to promote BCSC expansion and tumorigenesis
in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, Rab2A directly interacts with and prevents
dephosphorylation/inactivation of Erk1/2 by the MKP3 phosphatase, resulting in
Zeb1 upregulation and ß-catenin nuclear translocation. In cancer cells, Rab2A is 
activated via gene amplification, mutation or Pin1 overexpression. Rab2A
overexpression or mutation endows BCSC traits to primary normal human breast
epithelial cells, whereas silencing Rab2A potently inhibits the expansion and
tumorigenesis of freshly isolated BCSCs. Finally, Rab2A overexpression correlates
with poor clinical outcome in breast cancer patients. Thus, Pin1/Rab2A/Erk drives
BCSC expansion and tumorigenicity, suggesting potential drug targets.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4401741
PMID: 25818297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cancer Sci. 2015 Jun;106(6):709-17. doi: 10.1111/cas.12662. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Adaptor protein CRK induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis of
bladder cancer cells through HGF/c-Met feedback loop.

Matsumoto R(1,)(2), Tsuda M(1), Wang L(3), Maishi N(4), Abe T(2), Kimura T(1),
Tanino M(1), Nishihara H(3), Hida K(4), Ohba Y(5), Shinohara N(2), Nonomura K(2),
Tanaka S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Pathology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (2)Department of Urology, Hokkaido University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (3)Department of Translational Pathology,
Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (4)Division of
Vascular Biology, Hokkaido University IGM Institute for Genetic Medicine Frontier
Research Unit, Sapporo, Japan. (5)Department of Cell Physiology, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

We have previously reported that an adaptor protein CRK, including CRK-I and
CRK-II, plays essential roles in the malignant potential of various aggressive
human cancers, suggesting the validity of targeting CRK in molecular targeted
therapy of a wide range of cancers. Nevertheless, the role of CRK in human
bladder cancer with marked invasion, characterized by distant metastasis and poor
prognosis, remains obscure. In the present study, immunohistochemistry indicated 
a striking enhancement of CRK-I/-II, but not CRK-like, in human bladder cancer
tissues compared to normal urothelium. We established CRK-knockdown bladder
cancer cells using 5637 and UM-UC-3, which showed a significant decline in cell
migration, invasion, and proliferation. It is noteworthy that an elimination of
CRK conferred suppressed phosphorylation of c-Met and the downstream scaffold
protein Gab1 in a hepatocyte growth factor-dependent and -independent manner. In 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related molecules, E-cadherin was upregulated
by CRK elimination, whereas N-cadherin, vimentin, and Zeb1 were downregulated. A 
similar effect was observed following treatment with c-Met inhibitor SU11274.
Depletion of CRK significantly decreased cell proliferation of 5637 and UM-UC-3, 
consistent with reduced activity of ERK. An orthotopic xenograft model with
bioluminescent imaging revealed that CRK knockdown significantly attenuated not
only tumor volume but also the number of circulating tumor cells, resulted in a
complete abrogation of metastasis. Taken together, this evidence uncovered
essential roles of CRK in invasive bladder cancer through the hepatocyte growth
factor/c-Met/CRK feedback loop for epithelial-mesenchymal transition induction.
Thus, CRK might be a potent molecular target in bladder cancer, particularly for 
preventing metastasis, leading to the resolution of clinically longstanding
critical issues.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4471787
PMID: 25816892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jun 28;362(1):83-96. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.03.025. Epub
2015 Mar 23.

17-DMCHAG, a new geldanamycin derivative, inhibits prostate cancer cells through 
Hsp90 inhibition and survivin downregulation.

Wang J(1), Li Z(2), Lin Z(1), Zhao B(2), Wang Y(1), Peng R(1), Wang M(1), Lu
C(2), Shi G(3), Shen Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Urology
Research Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 200240, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Chemical Biology (Ministry of Education), School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Shandong University, No. 44 West Wenhua Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China.
(3)Department of Urology, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Urology
Research Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 200240, China. Electronic address:
dr.sgw@189.cn. (4)Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology (Ministry of Education),
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, No. 44 West Wenhua Road, 
Jinan, Shandong 250012, China. Electronic address: yshen@sdu.edu.cn.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a molecular chaperone involved in the stability 
of many client proteins, including androgen receptor (AR) and survivin, making
Hsp90 an attractive molecular therapeutic target for prostate cancer. Several
Hsp90 inhibitors have shown antitumor activity in various preclinical models and 
in clinical trials. Geldanamycin is a well-known inhibitor of Hsp90, but its
associated liver toxicity limited its clinical development. Here, we report a
highly effective and low-hepatotoxic geldanamycin derivative that exhibits
antitumor activity against human prostate cancer cells. Treatment of cells with
17-DMCHAG (17-(6-(3,4-dimethoxycinnamamido)hexylamino)-17-demethoxy-geldanamycin)
dose-dependently suppressed the proliferation, reduced colony formation and
induced apoptosis of human prostate cancer cell lines. 17-DMCHAG exhibits
anti-invasive and anti-migratory activities in prostate cancer cells through
down-regulating of transcription factors Zeb1, Snail1, Slug, and mesenchymal
marker Vimentin, while up-regulating the epithelial marker of E-cadherin.
Furthermore, 17-DMCHAG treatment damaged the Hsp90/AR and Hsp90/survivin
complexes and induced the proteasome-dependent degradation of AR and survivin,
then inhibited the activity of these two proteins. In vivo, we observed that
17-DMCHAG showed strong antitumor effects in LNCaP and DU-145 cell-xenografted
nude mice. Thus, 17-DMCHAG is a potential treatment for prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25813406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Nov;230(11):2706-17. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24995.

Loss of MicroRNA-101 Promotes Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition in
Hepatocytes.

Zhao S(1), Zhang Y(1), Zheng X(1), Tu X(1), Li H(1), Chen J(1,)(2), Zang
Y(1,)(2), Zhang J(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Science, 
Nanjing University, Nanjing, PR China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Analytical
Chemistry for Life Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing, PR China. (3)Jiangsu
Engineering Research Center for microRNA Biology and Biotechnology, Nanjing, PR
China.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been implicated in embryonic
development and various pathological events. However, the involvement of microRNA
in the process of EMT remains to be fully defined in hepatocyte. ZEB1 is a
well-known transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin and plays a major role in
triggering EMT during organ fibrosis and cancer cell metastasis. Computational
microRNA target predictions detect a conserved sequence matching to miR-101 in
the 3'UTR of ZEB1 mRNA. Our results confirm that miR-101 suppresses ZEB1
expression by targeting the predicted site of ZEB1 3'UTR. Subsequent
investigations show that miR-101 is significantly downregulated in the cultured
hepatocytes undergoing EMT and in the hepatocytes isolated from fibrotic liver.
Along with the loss of miR-101, the ZEB1 expression increases simultaneously in
hepatocytes. In addition, miR-101 levels in HCC cell lines are negatively
associated with the ZEB1 productions and the metastatic potentials of tumor
cells. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that miR-101 significantly inhibits the
TGF-ß1-induced EMT in hepatocytes, whereas inhibition of miR-101 promotes the EMT
process as indicated by the changes of morphology, cell migration, and the
expression profiles of EMT markers. In the fibrotic liver, ectopic expression of 
miR-101 can significantly downregulate ZEB1 in the hepatocyte and thereby reduces
the mesenchymal marker expression. Moreover, miR-101 significantly inhibits the
proliferation and migration of HCC cell. Our results demonstrate that miR-101
regulates HCC cell phenotype by upregulating the epithelial marker genes and
suppressing the mesenchymal ones.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25808945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Oncogene. 2016 Jan 14;35(2):158-72. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.69. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

miR-200 promotes the mesenchymal to epithelial transition by suppressing multiple
members of the Zeb2 and Snail1 transcriptional repressor complexes.

Perdigão-Henriques R(1,)(2,)(3), Petrocca F(1), Altschuler G(4), Thomas MP(1), Le
MT(1), Tan SM(1), Hide W(4,)(5), Lieberman J(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Medicine Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA. (2)Animal Cell Technology Unit, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e
Biológica (ITQB), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal. (3)Instituto de 
Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica (IBET), Oeiras, Portugal. (4)Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Sheffield
Institute for Translational Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, University 
of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

The miR-200 family promotes the epithelial state by suppressing the Zeb1/Zeb2
epithelial gene transcriptional repressors. To identify other miR-200-regulated
genes, we isolated mRNAs bound to transfected biotinylated miR-200c in mouse
breast cancer cells. In all, 520 mRNAs were significantly enriched in miR-200c
binding at least twofold. Putative miR-200-regulated genes included Zeb2,
enriched 3.5-fold in the pull down. However, Zeb2 knockdown does not fully
recapitulate miR-200c overexpression, suggesting that regulating other miR-200
targets contributes to miR-200's enhancement of epithelial gene expression.
Candidate genes were highly enriched for miR-200c seed pairing in their 3'UTR and
coding sequence and for genes that were downregulated by miR-200c overexpression.
Epidermal growth factor receptor and downstream MAPK signaling pathways were the 
most enriched pathways. Genes whose products mediate transforming growth factor
(TGF)-ß signaling were also significantly overrepresented, and miR-200
counteracted the suppressive effects of TGF-ß and bone morphogenic protein 2
(BMP-2) on epithelial gene expression. miR-200c regulated the 3'UTRs of 12 of 14 
putative miR-200c-binding mRNAs tested. The extent of mRNA binding to miR-200c
strongly correlated with gene suppression. Twelve targets of miR-200c (Crtap,
Fhod1, Smad2, Map3k1, Tob1, Ywhag/14-3-3<U+03B3>, Ywhab/14-3-3ß, Smad5, Zfp36, Xbp1,
Mapk12, Snail1) were experimentally validated by identifying their 3'UTR miR-200 
recognition elements. Smad2 and Smad5 form a complex with Zeb2 and Ywhab/14-3-3ß 
and Ywhag/14-3-3<U+03B3> form a complex with Snail1. These complexes that repress
transcription assemble on epithelial gene promoters. miR-200 overexpression
induced RNA polymerase II localization and reduced Zeb2 and Snail1 binding to
epithelial gene promoters. Expression of miR-200-resistant Smad5 modestly, but
significantly, reduced epithelial gene induction by miR-200. miR-200 expression
and Zeb2 knockdown are known to inhibit cell invasion in in vitro assays.
Knockdown of each of three novel miR-200 target genes identified here, Smad5,
Ywhag and Crtap, also profoundly suppressed cell invasion. Thus, miR-200
suppresses TGF-ß/BMP signaling, promotes epithelial gene expression and
suppresses cell invasion by regulating a network of genes.

PMID: 25798844  [PubMed - in process]


230. Oncogene. 2016 Jan 14;35(2):173-86. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.71. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

The miR-200 family and the miR-183~96~182 cluster target Foxf2 to inhibit
invasion and metastasis in lung cancers.

Kundu ST(1), Byers LA(1), Peng DH(1), Roybal JD(1), Diao L(2), Wang J(2), Tong
P(2), Creighton CJ(2,)(3), Gibbons DL(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Metastatic lung cancer is one of the most lethal forms of cancer and molecular
pathways driving metastasis are still not clearly elucidated. Metastatic cancer
cells undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) where they lose their
epithelial properties and acquire a migratory and invasive phenotype. Here we
identify that the expression of microRNAs from the miR-200 family and the
miR-183~96~182 cluster are significantly co-repressed in non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines and primary tumors from multiple TCGA dataset with high EMT
scores. Ectopic expression of the miR-183~96~182 cluster inhibited cancer cell
migration and invasion, whereas its expression was tightly modulated by miR-200. 
We identified Foxf2 as a common, novel and direct target of both these microRNA
families. Foxf2 expression tightly correlates with the transcription factor Zeb1 
and is elevated in mesenchymal-like metastatic lung cancer cells. Foxf2
expression induced robust EMT, migration, invasion and metastasis in lung cancer 
cells, whereas Foxf2 inhibition significantly repressed these phenotypes. We also
demonstrated that Foxf2 transcriptionally represses E-cadherin and miR-200,
independent of Zeb1, to form a double-negative feedback loop. We, therefore,
identified a novel mechanism whereby the miR-200 family and the miR-183~96~182
cluster inhibit lung cancer invasion and metastasis by targeting Foxf2.

PMCID: PMC4580489 [Available on 2016-07-14]
PMID: 25798833  [PubMed - in process]


231. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Mar;3(2):435-441. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Clinical significance of zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 mRNA levels in
peritoneal washing for gastric cancer.

Yabusaki N(1), Yamada S(1), Murai T(1), Kanda M(1), Kobayashi D(1), Tanaka C(1), 
Fujii T(1), Nakayama G(1), Sugimoto H(1), Koike M(1), Nomoto S(1), Fujiwara M(1),
Kodera Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery (Surgery II), Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.

Zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is an important regulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and is associated with various types of
metastasis. Gastric cancer patients often develop peritoneal carcinomatosis, of
which the detection of free cancer cells in the peritoneal washes is an important
predictor. We analyzed the correlation of ZEB1 mRNA levels in the peritoneal
washing (pZEB1) with clinicopathological variables and survival in 107 gastric
cancer patients who underwent surgery and peritoneal washing cytology. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was performed to quantify pZEB1. The
patients were classified into the pZEB1(High) (n=27) and the pZEB1(Low) (n=80)
groups based on their pZEB1 expression. pZEB1 was statistically correlated with
pathological T stage (P=0.03) and vascular involvement (P=0.03). At 5 years, the 
disease-specific survival was 36.4% for the pZEB1(High) group and 64.7% for the
pZEB1(Low) group (P=0.02), whereas the disease-free survival rate was 46.9% for
the pZEB1(High) group and 83.0% for the pZEB1(Low) group (P=0.03). When
subclassified into 4 categories based on washing cytology and pZEB1, survival was
significantly lower in the pZEB1(High) compared to the pZEB1(Low) group (cytology
-negative group, P=0.01; cytology -positive group, P=0.13). Therefore, pZEB1 may 
add valuable information to conventional peritoneal washing cytology as a
prognostic determinant in gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC4360855
PMID: 25798282  [PubMed]


232. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):7408-23.

Deciphering the cellular source of tumor relapse identifies CD44 as a major
therapeutic target in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Molejon MI(1), Tellechea JI(1,)(2), Loncle C(1), Gayet O(1), Gilabert M(1),
Duconseil P(1), Lopez-Millan MB(1), Moutardier V(1,)(2), Gasmi M(1,)(2), Garcia
S(1,)(2), Turrini O(1,)(3), Ouaissi M(4), Poizat F(3), Dusetti N(1), Iovanna
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille (CRCM), INSERM U1068, CNRS
UMR 7258, Aix-Marseille Université and Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Parc
Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy, Marseille, France. (2)Hôpital Nord,
Marseille, France. (3)Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France. (4)Hôpital de 
la Timone, Marseille, France.

It has been commonly found that in patients presenting Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma (PDAC), after a period of satisfactory response to standard
treatments, the tumor becomes non-responsive and patient death quickly follows.
This phenomenon is mainly due to the rapid and uncontrolled development of the
residual tumor. The origin and biological characteristics of residual tumor cells
in PDAC still remain unclear. In this work, using PDACs from patients, preserved 
as xenografts in nude mice, we demonstrated that a residual PDAC tumor originated
from a small number of CD44+ cells present in the tumor. During PDAC relapse,
proliferating CD44+ cells decrease expression of ZEB1, while overexpressing the
MUC1 protein, and gain morphological and biological characteristics of
differentiation. Also, we report that CD44+ cells, in primary and residual PDAC
tumors, are part of a heterogeneous population, which includes variable numbers
of CD133+ and EpCAM+ cells. We confirmed the propagation of CD44+ cells in
samples from cases of human relapse, following standard PDAC treatment. Finally, 
using systemic administration of anti-CD44 antibodies in vivo, we demonstrated
that CD44 is an efficient therapeutic target for treating tumor relapse, but not 
primary PDAC tumors. We conclude that CD44+ cells generate the relapsing tumor
and, as such, are themselves promising therapeutic targets for treating patients 
with recurrent PDAC.

PMCID: PMC4480689
PMID: 25797268  [PubMed - in process]


233. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Jun;26(6):675-85. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.01.005. Epub
2015 Mar 6.

Pterostilbene inhibits triple-negative breast cancer metastasis via inducing
microRNA-205 expression and negatively modulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition.

Su CM(1), Lee WH(2), Wu AT(3), Lin YK(4), Wang LS(5), Wu CH(6), Yeh CT(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei 110, Taiwan; Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University 
Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei 235, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pathology, Taipei
Medical University Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei 235, Taiwan. (3)College of Medical 
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan;
Translational Research Laboratory, Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University
Hospital, Taipei 110, Taiwan. (4)Biostatistics and Research Consultation Center, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan;
Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University
Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei 235, Taiwan. (6)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan;
Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei 235, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: chwu@tmu.edu.tw. (7)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan;
Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Medical University Shuang Ho
Hospital, Taipei 235, Taiwan. Electronic address: ctyeh@s.tmu.edu.tw.

Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths among females in
economically developing countries. Greater than 95% of breast malignancies are of
epithelial origin; the induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
has been shown to initiate the metastatic process in breast carcinoma and remains
the key target for drug development. Here, we examine the anti-metastatic
potential of pterostilbene in modulating EMT process in breast cancer cells both 
in vitro and in vivo. The differential invasive ability among MCF7, Hs578t and
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines were closely correlated with the expression
of EMT markers, determined by Western blots and Matrigel-coated transwells assay.
Pterostilbene inhibited the migratory and invasive potential of triple-negative
MDA-MB-231 and Hs578t cells, accompanied by the up-regulation of E-cadherin and
down-regulation of Snail, Slug, vimentin and ZEB1. Mechanistic investigations
revealed a significant up-regulation of miR-205, which resulted in the reduction 
of Src expression in pterostilbene-treated breast cancer cells. Importantly,
pterostilbene suppressed tumor growth and metastasis in MDA-MB-231-bearing
NOD/SCID mice by reducing Src/Fak signaling; this observation was consistent with
the negative correlations between miR-205 and Src expression in both normal and
malignant breast tissues. Our findings provide supports for the usage of
pterostilbene as an inhibitor of EMT process and potential candidate for adjuvant
therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25792283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 19;6:6699. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7699.

Erratum: Different thresholds of ZEB1 are required for Ras-mediated tumour
initiation and metastasis.

Liu Y, Lu X, Huang L, Wang W, Jiang G, Dean KC, Clem B, Telang S, Jenson AB,
Cuatrecasas M, Chesney J, Darling DS, Postigo A, Dean DC.

Erratum for
    Nat Commun. 2014;5:5660.

PMID: 25789446  [PubMed]


235. J Cancer. 2015 Feb 15;6(4):342-50. doi: 10.7150/jca.10969. eCollection 2015.

Grainyhead-like 2 Promotes Tumor Growth and is Associated with Poor Prognosis in 
Colorectal Cancer.

Quan Y(1), Xu M(1), Cui P(1), Ye M(1), Zhuang B(1), Min Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Shanghai Pudong Hospital, Fudan
University Pudong Medical Center, Shanghai, 201399, China.

GRHL2 was implicated in regulating cancer development. Our previous study
demonstrated that knockdown GRHL2 in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells inhibited cell
proliferation by targeting ZEB1. It is unclear whether GRHL2 expression may have 
diagnostic or prognostic value in colorectal carcinoma. Additionally, how GRHL2
is associated with the clinical features of colorectal carcinoma is not known. In
current study, immunohistochemistry stains were performed to examine GRHL2 in 171
colorectal cancers and paired normal colon mucosa. The prognostic value of GRHL2 
was investigated in a retrospective cohort study with a five-year follow-up. The 
effects of GRHL2 on cell growth in vitro and in vivo were explored by GRHL2
over-expressing in HT29 and SW620 CRC cells. Further, the regulation of cell
cycle and proliferation proteins by GRHL2 were assessed by flow cytometry and
western blot. We found that GRHL2 was over-expressed in CRC tissues, and played
an important role in CRC tumorigenesis. GRHL2 expression positively correlated
with tumor size and TNM stage. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that GRHL2 was an
independent prognostic factor for both overall survival and recurrence-free
survival. Ectopic over-expression of GRHL2 in CRC cell line HT29 and SW620
induced an increase of cellular proliferation in vitro and promoting tumor growth
in vivo. The acquisition of GRHL2 regulated cell cycle and modulates the
expression of proliferation proteins p21, p27, cyclin A and cyclin D1. Together, 
our findings reveal GRHL2 can be used as a novel predictive biomarker and
represent a potential therapeutic target against CRC.

PMCID: PMC4349874
PMID: 25767604  [PubMed]


236. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Feb 20;8:461-70. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S78358. eCollection
2015.

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate suppresses cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis
and autophagy in oral cancer SSC-4 cells.

Irimie AI(1), Braicu C(2), Zanoaga O(2), Pileczki V(3), Gherman C(4),
Berindan-Neagoe I(5), Campian RS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics and Dental Materials, Faculty of Dental Medicine,
"Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Research Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania. (3)Research Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania ; Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy,
"Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)Research Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania ; Department of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The
Oncology Institute "Prof Dr. Ion Chiricuta", Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (5)Research
Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, "Iuliu
Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania ; Department
of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology Institute "Prof
Dr. Ion Chiricuta", Cluj-Napoca, Romania ; Department of Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania ; Department of Experimental
Therapeutics MD Anderson Cancer Center Houston, TX, USA. (6)Department of Oral
Rehabilitation, Faculty of Dental Medicine, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the major bioactive component of green tea. 
Our experimental data indicated that EGCG treatment suppresses cell proliferation
of SSC-4 human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), the effect being dose- and
time-dependent. In parallel was observed the activation of apoptosis and
autophagy, in response to EGCG exposure in SSC-4 cells. Treatment with EGCG
activates the expression of the BAD, BAK, FAS, IGF1R, WNT11, and ZEB1 genes and
inhibits CASP8, MYC, and TP53. All of these results suggest that EGCG has an
excellent potential to become a therapeutic compound for patients with OSCC, by
inducing tumor cell death via apoptosis and autophagy.

PMCID: PMC4346003
PMID: 25759589  [PubMed]


237. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Apr;36(4):459-68. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv017. Epub 2015 Mar 
6.

Aberrantly expressed Fra-1 by IL-6/STAT3 transactivation promotes colorectal
cancer aggressiveness through epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Liu H(1), Ren G(2), Wang T(1), Chen Y(1), Gong C(1), Bai Y(2), Wang B(2), Qi
H(1), Shen J(1), Zhu L(1), Qian C(3), Lai M(1), Shao J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Zhejiang Key Laboratory for
Disease Proteomics, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058,
China. (2)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, China. (3)Institute of Pathology and
Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, China. (4)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Zhejiang
Key Laboratory for Disease Proteomics, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou 310058, China, shaojimin@zju.edu.cn.

The pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) in tumor microenvironment has 
been suggested to promote development and progression of colorectal cancer (CRC).
However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive. In this study, we
demonstrate that fos-related antigen-1 (Fra-1) plays a critical role in IL-6
induced CRC aggressiveness and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In CRC
cell lines, the expression of Fra-1 gene was found significantly upregulated
during IL-6-driven EMT process. The Fra-1 induction occurred at transcriptional
level in a manner dependent on signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3), during which both phosphorylated and acetylated post-translational
modifications were required for STAT3 activation to directly bind to the Fra-1
promoter. Importantly, RNA interference-based attenuation of either STAT3 or
Fra-1 prevented IL-6-induced EMT, cell migration and invasion, whereas ectopic
expression of Fra-1 markedly reversed the STAT3-knockdown effect and enhanced CRC
cell aggressiveness by regulating the expression of EMT-promoting factors (ZEB1, 
Snail, Slug, MMP-2 and MMP-9). Furthermore, Fra-1 levels were positively
correlated with the local invasion depth as well as lymph node and liver
metastasis in a total of 229 CRC patients. Intense immunohistochemical staining
of Fra-1 was observed at the tumor marginal area adjacent to inflammatory cells
and in parallel with IL-6 secretion and STAT3 activation in CRC tissues.
Together, this study proposes the existence of an aberrant IL-6/STAT3/Fra-1
signaling axis leading to CRC aggressiveness through EMT induction, which
suggests novel therapeutic opportunities for the malignant disease.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4392608
PMID: 25750173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 20;6(8):6310-25.

FBXW7 suppresses epithelial-mesenchymal transition, stemness and metastatic
potential of cholangiocarcinoma cells.

Yang H(1), Lu X(1,)(2), Liu Z(3), Chen L(4), Xu Y(1), Wang Y(5), Wei G(5), Chen
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
Jinan, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Jinan Central Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan, China. (3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Jinan
Fifth People's Hospital, Jinan, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Jinan Fourth
People's Hospital, Jinan, China. (5)Department of Anatomy and Key Laboratory of
Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education, Shandong University School of
Medicine, Jinan, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a fundamental role in cancer
metastasis. The ubiquitin ligase FBXW7, a general tumor suppressor in human
cancer, has been implicated in diverse cellular processes, however, its role in
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) metastasis has not been identified. Here, we report a
crucial role of FBXW7 in CCA metastasis by regulating EMT. Loss of FBXW7
expression was detected in CCA cells and clinical specimens. Clinicopathological 
analysis revealed a close correlation between FBXW7 deficiency and metastasis,
TNM stage and differentiation in intrahepatic CCA and perihilar CCA. Moreover,
FBXW7 silencing in CCA cells dramatically promoted EMT, stem-like capacity and
metastasis both in vitro and in vivo. Conversely, FBXW7 overexpression attenuated
these processes. Mechanistically, treatment with rapamycin, a mTOR inhibitor,
inhibited EMT, stem-like capacity and metastasis induced by FBXW7 silencing both 
in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the expression of EMT regulating transcription
factors, snail, slug and ZEB1, were also decreased markedly with rapamycin
treatment. In addition, silencing ZEB1 inhibited EMT and metastasis of both CCA
cells and FBXW7 deficient CCA cells, which implicated the potential role of ZEB1 
in FBXW7/mTOR signaling pathway related CCA metastasis. In conclusion, our
findings defined a pivotal function of FBXW7 in CCA metastasis by regulating EMT.

PMCID: PMC4467439
PMID: 25749036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Int J Oncol. 2015 May;46(5):2251-60. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2916. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Proteasome inhibitor-resistant cells cause EMT-induction via suppression of
E-cadherin by miR-200 and ZEB1.

Asakura T(1), Yamaguchi N(1), Ohkawa K(1), Yoshida K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo
105-8461, Japan.

Downregulation of E-cadherin (gene: CDH1) plays an important role in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is critical for normal development
and disease states. As a result of long-term treatment of endometrial carcinoma
Ishikawa cells with epoxomicin (EXM), the cells exhibited the phenotype for
EXM-resistance (Ish/EXM cells). Moreover, CDH1 mRNA and its protein were
suppressed and EMT was induced in Ish/EXM cells. Ish/EXM cells exhibited
drug-resistance to other proteasome inhibitors, MG-132, PSI and PS-341
(Bortezomib). The proteasome inhibitor-resistant cells acquired invasiveness as a
result of the chemotherapy. In Ish/EXM cells, E-cadherin was suppressed by
upregulation of its transcriptional repressor ZEB1. Furthermore, expression of
the miR-200 family (miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-141) found in Ishikawa
cells was suppressed in Ish/EXM cells. Overexpression of the miR-200 family in
Ish/EXM cells caused by transfection with the pre-miR-200 family induced
downregulation of ZEB1 and enhanced expression of E-cadherin. Conversely,
suppression of miR-200 expression in the Ishikawa cells by transfection with
anti-miR-200 elevated the expression of ZEB1 and suppressed the expression of
E-cadherin. These results suggest that acquirement of EXM-resistance in Ish/EXM
cells induces up regulation of ZEB1 via suppression of the miR-200 family
following suppression of E-cadherin. Since suppression of ZEB1 in Ish/EXM cells
by treatment with its siRNA did not restore the miR-200 family expression,
miR-200 family was placed upstream of ZEB1 to regulate the expression.

PMID: 25738863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Feb;35(2):179-84.

[Effect of MSX2 interference on epithelial-mesenchymal transitions of pancreatic 
cancer cell line PANC-1].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang D(1), Ma X, Wu B, Cui P, Liu H, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu
Medical College, Bengbu, Bengbu, 233000, China.E-mail: zdy527897470@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of MSX2 interference on
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) of pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1.
METHODS: Three vectors containing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) of MSX2 (shMSX2-1, 
shMSX2-2, and shMSX2-3) and the empty vector (negative control) were transfected 
separately into PANC-1 cell line with Lipofectamine2000. Real-time RT-PCR and
Western blotting were used to observe changes in the expressions of MSX2,
E-cadherin, and vimentin in the cells. CCK-8 assay was used to assess the changes
in the cell growth, and wound scratch assay and Transwell assay were employed to 
evaluate the cell invasion and metastasis after the transfection.
RESULTS: Among the 3 shRNA, shMSX2-1 showed the highest interference efficiency. 
MSX2 knockdown by the specific shRNA of MSX2 significantly increased E-cadherin
expressions, lowered vimentin expressions, and suppressed the invasion,
metastasis and proliferation of the cells (P<0.05). MSX2 knockdown also resulted 
in morphological changes of the cells into cobblestone-like cells in close
contact. RT-PCR results revealed significantly reduced mRNA expressions of the
transcription factors snail and twist (P<0.05) without affecting slug and zeb1
expressions in the cells with MSX2 knockdown. Conclusion MSX2 knockdown can
reverse EMT and induce MET in PANC1 cells, in which process the transcription
factors snail and twist may play a role.

PMID: 25736109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Feb 17;9:1027-62. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S74412. eCollection
2015.

The pan-inhibitor of Aurora kinases danusertib induces apoptosis and autophagy
and suppresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human breast cancer cells.

Li JP(1), Yang YX(2), Liu QL(3), Zhou ZW(4), Pan ST(5), He ZX(6), Zhang X(7),
Yang T(8), Pan SY(9), Duan W(10), He SM(11), Chen XW(12), Qiu JX(13), Zhou SF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, Ningxia, People's Republic of China ; Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL, USA. (2)Department of Colorectal Surgery, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, Ningxia, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of
Surgical Oncology, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan,
Ningxia, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA ; Guizhou
Provincial Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell and Tissue
Engineering Research Center and Sino-US Joint Laboratory for Medical Sciences,
Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA ; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, People's
Republic of China. (6)Guizhou Provincial Key Laboratory for Regenerative
Medicine, Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering Research Center and Sino-US Joint
Laboratory for Medical Sciences, Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou,
People's Republic of China. (7)Research Center for Bioengineering and Sensing
Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah and
Salt Lake Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (9)Department
of Pharmacology, School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing, People's Republic of China. (10)School of Medicine, Deakin
University, Waurn Ponds, VIC, Australia. (11)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Xiaolan People's Hospital affiliated to Southern Medical University, 
Zhongshan, Guangdong, People's Republic of China. (12)Department of General
Surgery, The First People's Hospital of Shunde affiliated to Southern Medical
University, Shunde, Foshan, Guangdong, People's Republic of China. (13)Department
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, People's Republic of China.

Danusertib (Danu) is a pan-inhibitor of Aurora kinases and a third-generation
breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1
(Bcr-Abl) tyrosine kinase inhibitor, but its antitumor effect and underlying
mechanisms in the treatment of human breast cancer remain elusive. This study
aimed to investigate the effects of Danu on the growth, apoptosis, autophagy, and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the molecular mechanisms in human 
breast cancer MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. The results demonstrated that Danu
remarkably inhibited cell proliferation, induced apoptosis and autophagy, and
suppressed EMT in both breast cancer cell lines. Danu arrested MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells in G2/M phase, accompanied by the downregulation of
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 and cyclin B1 and upregulation of p21 Waf1/Cip1, p27
Kip1, and p53. Danu significantly decreased the expression of B-cell
lymphoma-extra-large (Bcl-xl) and B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), but increased the
expression of Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) and p53-upregulated modulator of
apoptosis (PUMA), and promoted the cleavage of caspases 3 and 9. Furthermore,
Danu significantly increased the expression levels of the membrane-bound
microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3 (LC3-II) and beclin 1 in
breast cancer cells, two markers for autophagy. Danu induced the activation of
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and extracellular signal-regulated
kinases 1 and 2 (Erk1/2) and inhibited the activation of protein kinase B
(Akt)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathways in breast cancer
cells. Treatment with wortmannin (a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor)
markedly inhibited Danu-induced activation of p38 MAPK and conversion of
cytosolic LC3-I to membrane-bound LC3-II. Pharmacological inhibition and small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of p38 MAPK suppressed Akt activation,
resulting in LC3-II accumulation and enhanced autophagy. Pharmacological
inhibition and small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of Erk1/2 also remarkably
increased the level of LC3-II in MCF7 cells. Moreover, Danu inhibited EMT in both
MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells with upregulated E-cadherin and zona occludens protein 
1 (ZO-1) but downregulated N-cadherin, zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1
(TCF8/ZEB1), snail, slug, vimentin, and ß-catenin. Notably, Danu showed lower
cytotoxicity toward normal breast epithelial MCF10A cells. These findings
indicate that Danu promotes cellular apoptosis and autophagy but inhibits EMT in 
human breast cancer cells via modulation of p38 MAPK/Erk1/2/Akt/mTOR signaling
pathways. Danu may represent a promising anticancer agent for breast cancer
treatment. More studies are warranted to fully delineate the underlying
mechanisms, efficacy, and safety of Danu in breast cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4338784
PMID: 25733818  [PubMed - in process]


242. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Feb 17;9:993-1026. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S73493.
eCollection 2015.

Bardoxolone methyl induces apoptosis and autophagy and inhibits
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and stemness in esophageal squamous cancer
cells.

Wang YY(1), Yang YX(2), Zhao R(3), Pan ST(4), Zhe H(3), He ZX(5), Duan W(6),
Zhang X(7), Yang T(8), Qiu JX(9), Zhou SF(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, People's Republic of China ; Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Colorectal Surgery, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Radiation
Oncology, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, People's
Republic of China. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA ; Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, People's Republic of China. (5)Guizhou Provincial Key Laboratory for
Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering Research Center and
Sino-US Joint Laboratory for Medical Sciences, Guiyang Medical University,
Guiyang, People's Republic of China. (6)School of Medicine, Deakin University,
Waurn Ponds, VIC, Australia. (7)Research Center for Bioengineering and Sensing
Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah and
Salt Lake Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (9)Department
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, People's Republic of China. (10)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL, USA ; Guizhou Provincial Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell 
and Tissue Engineering Research Center and Sino-US Joint Laboratory for Medical
Sciences, Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang, People's Republic of China.

Natural and synthetic triterpenoids have been shown to kill cancer cells via
multiple mechanisms. The therapeutic effect and underlying mechanism of the
synthetic triterpenoid bardoxolone methyl (C-28 methyl ester of
2-cyano-3,12-dioxoolean-1,9-dien-28-oic acid; CDDO-Me) on esophageal cancer are
unclear. Herein, we aimed to investigate the anticancer effects and underlying
mechanisms of CDDO-Me in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells.
Our study showed that CDDO-Me suppressed the proliferation and arrested cells in 
G2/M phase, and induced apoptosis in human ESCC Ec109 and KYSE70 cells. The G2/M 
arrest was accompanied with upregulated p21Waf1/Cip1 and p53 expression. CDDO-Me 
significantly decreased B-cell lymphoma-extra large (Bcl-xl), B-cell lymphoma 2
(Bcl-2), cleaved caspase-9, and cleaved poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) levels 
but increased the expression level of Bcl-2-associated X (Bax). Furthermore,
CDDO-Me induced autophagy in both Ec109 and KYSE70 cells via suppression of the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/protein kinase B/mammalian target of rapamycin
(PI3K/Akt/mTOR) signaling pathway. There were interactions between the autophagic
and apoptotic pathways in Ec109 and KYSE70 cells subject to CDDO-Me treatment.
CDDO-Me also scavenged reactive oxygen species through activation of the nuclear 
factor (erythroid-derived 2)-related factor 2 (Nrf2) pathway in Ec109 and KYSE70 
cells. CDDO-Me inhibited cell invasion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and
stemness in Ec109 and KYSE70 cells. CDDO-Me significantly downregulated
E-cadherin but upregulated Snail, Slug, and zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 
(TCF-8/ZEB1) in Ec109 and KYSE70 cells. CDDO-Me significantly decreased the
expression of octamer-4, sex determining region Y-box 2 (Sox-2), Nanog, and B
lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog (Bmi-1), all markers of cancer cell
stemness, in Ec109 and KYSE70 cells. Taken together, these results indicate that 
CDDO-Me is a promising anticancer agent against ESCC. Further studies are
warranted to explore the molecular targets, efficacy and safety of CDDO-Me in the
treatment of ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4338783
PMID: 25733817  [PubMed - in process]


243. Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 2;58(1):35-46. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.023. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

MCRIP1, an ERK substrate, mediates ERK-induced gene silencing during
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by regulating the co-repressor CtBP.

Ichikawa K(1), Kubota Y(2), Nakamura T(2), Weng JS(3), Tomida T(4), Saito H(5),
Takekawa M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department of
Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Research Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan; Division of
Molecular Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry,
Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033,
Japan. (2)Division of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department of
Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Research Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan. (3)Division of
Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (4)Division of Molecular
Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku,
Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (5)Division of Molecular Cell Signaling, Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan;
Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address:
h-saito@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp. (6)Division of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, 
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639,
Japan; Department of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan;
Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address:
takekawa@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

The ERK pathway not only upregulates growth-promoting genes, but also
downregulates anti-proliferative and tumor-suppressive genes. In particular,
ERK signaling contributes to repression of the E-cadherin gene during
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The CtBP transcriptional co-repressor is
also involved in gene silencing of E-cadherin. However, the functional
relationship between ERK signaling and CtBP is unknown. Here, we identified an
ERK substrate, designated MCRIP1, which bridges ERK signaling and CtBP-mediated
gene silencing. CtBP is recruited to promoter elements of target genes by
interacting with the DNA-binding transcriptional repressor ZEB1. We found that
MCRIP1 binds to CtBP, thereby competitively inhibiting CtBP-ZEB1 interaction.
When phosphorylated by ERK, MCRIP1 dissociates from CtBP, allowing CtBP to
interact with ZEB1. In this manner, the CtBP co-repressor complex is recruited
to, and silences, the E-cadherin promoter by inducing chromatin modifications.
Our findings reveal a molecular mechanism underlying ERK-induced epigenetic gene 
silencing during EMT and its dysregulation in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25728771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Histopathology. 2015 Oct;67(4):491-500. doi: 10.1111/his.12668. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

The prognostic role of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers E-cadherin
and Slug in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Cappellesso R(1), Marioni G(2), Crescenzi M(3), Giacomelli L(1), Guzzardo V(1),
Mussato A(1), Staffieri A(2), Martini A(2), Blandamura S(1), Fassina A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Pathology and Cytopathology Unit, Department of Medicine, University 
of Padova, Padova, Italy. (2)Otolaryngology Section, Department of Neurosciences,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (3)Radiotherapy Unit, Istituto Oncologico
Veneto IOV, IRCCS, Padova, Italy.

AIMS: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) prognosis is definitely related to
lymph node metastasis. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) allows neoplastic 
cells to gain the plasticity and motility required for tumour progression and
metastasis. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of EMT in the
prognosis of LSCC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis of E-cadherin, N-cadherin,
Snail, Slug, ZEB1, and ZEB2 was performed in 37 consecutive LSCC cases. Low
E-cadherin levels and high Slug levels correlated with both disease recurrence (P
= 0.02 and P =0.01, respectively) and shorter disease-free survival (DFS) (P =
0.04 and P = 0.02, respectively). Relative expression levels of CDH1, SNAI2,
miR-1 and the miR-200 family were also evaluated. CDH1, miR-200a and miR-200c
down-regulation and SNAI2 overexpression were significantly associated with
disease recurrence (P = 0.03, P = 0.02, P = 0.04, and P = 0.04, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: EMT increases tumour recurrence risk and shortens DFS in LSCC.
E-cadherin and Slug immunohistochemical analysis could be useful for identifying 
patients requiring more aggressive treatment after surgery.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25684546  [PubMed - in process]


245. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Mar 1;91(3):650-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.11.013. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Epigenetic regulation of KLHL34 predictive of pathologic response to preoperative
chemoradiation therapy in rectal cancer patients.

Ha YJ(1), Kim CW(2), Roh SA(1), Cho DH(3), Park JL(4), Kim SY(4), Kim JH(5), Choi
EK(6), Kim YS(7), Kim JC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; 
Institute of Innovative Cancer Research and Asan Institute for Life Sciences,
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Surgery, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Institute of Innovative Cancer Research and
Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea; Graduate
School of East-West Medical Science, Kyung Hee University, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(4)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience &
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Institute of Innovative
Cancer Research and Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul,
Korea. (7)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience & Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea; Institute of Innovative Cancer
Research and Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
Electronic address: yongsung@kribb.re.kr. (8)Department of Surgery, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Institute of Innovative Cancer Research 
and Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
Electronic address: jckim@amc.seoul.kr.

PURPOSE: Prediction of individual responsiveness to preoperative chemoradiation
therapy (CRT) is urgently needed in patients with poorly responsive locally
advanced rectal cancer (LARC).
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Candidate methylation genes associated with
radiosensitivity were identified using a 3-step process. In the first step,
genome-wide screening of methylation genes was performed in correlation with
histopathologic tumor regression grade in 45 patients with LARC. In the second
step, the methylation status of selected sites was analyzed by pyrosequencing in 
67 LARC patients, including 24 patients analyzed in the first step. Finally,
colorectal cancer cell clones with stable KLHL34 knockdown were generated and
tested for cellular sensitivity to radiation.
RESULTS: Genome-wide screening identified 7 hypermethylated CpG sites (DZIP1
cg24107021, DZIP1 cg26886381, ZEB1 cg04430381, DKK3 cg041006961, STL cg00991794, 
KLHL34 cg01828474, and ARHGAP6 cg07828380) associated with preoperative CRT
responses. Radiosensitivity in patients with hypermethylated KLHL34 cg14232291
was confirmed by pyrosequencing in additional cohorts. Knockdown of KLHL34
significantly reduced colony formation (KLHL34 sh#1: 20.1%, P=.0001 and KLHL34
sh#2: 15.8%, P=.0002), increased the cytotoxicity (KLHL34 sh#1: 14.8%, P=.019 and
KLHL34 sh#2: 17.9%, P=.007) in LoVo cells, and increased radiation-induced
caspase-3 activity and the sub-G1 population of cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The methylation status of KLHL34 cg14232291 may be a predictive
candidate of sensitivity to preoperative CRT, although further validation is
needed in large cohorts using various cell types.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25680604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Dec 1;7(12):8692-9. eCollection 2014.

Proline-rich protein 11 regulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition to promote
breast cancer cell invasion.

Zhou F(1), Liu H(1), Zhang X(1), Shen Y(1), Zheng D(1), Zhang A(1), Lai Y(1), Li 
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine and Breast Surgery, First Afflliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University Chongqing 400016, China.

Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in women world wide which is
closely related to metastasis. Recent studies argue that breast cancer cells that
have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) acquire aggressive
malignant properties, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this transition are
poorly understood. In this study, we found that increased expression of
proline-rich protein 11 (PRR11) was associated with the progression of breast
cancer and that PRR11 protein levels were significantly elevated in breast
cancer. High PRR11 levels also predict shorter overall survival of breast cancer 
patients. Moreover, we found that the forced expression of PRR11 decreased the
expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin but increased the mesenchymal
markers in breast cancer cells. In contrast, silencing PRR11 in metastatic breast
tumor cells promoted a shift toward an epithelial morphology concomitant with
increased expression of E-cadherin and decreased expression of mesenchymal
markers. PRR11 silencing also reduced the expression of EMT-inducing
transcription factors (Snail, Slug, ZEB1 and ZEB2).

PMCID: PMC4314043
PMID: 25674234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2015 Feb 25;67(1):83-9.

[DZNep raises miR-200c expression to delay the invasion and migration of MGC-803 
gastric carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Ning XH(1), Guo R(1), Han L(2), Zhang AL(2), Liu X(1), Li ZX(1), Kang CS(2),
Zhang QY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin 300052, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University 
General Hospital and Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Tianjin 300052, China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin
Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China. zhangqy@tijmu.edu.cn.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the regulatory effects of histone
methylation modifications on the expression of miR-200c, as well as invasion and 
migration of gastric carcinoma cells. Gastric carcinoma cell line, MGC-803, were 
treated by 2.5 µmol/L histone methyltransferase inhibitor, DZNep. The expression 
of miR-200c was detected by real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR). The
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) indicators (ZEB1/2 and E/N-cadherin),
EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and H3K27me3 expressions were detected by Western blot. Cell
migration and invasion abilities were detected by Transwell and scratch tests.
The result showed that, compared with DMSO (control) group, DZNep significantly
increased the expression of miR-200c to about 2.1 times, inhibited ZEB1, ZEB2,
and N-cadherin expressions, and activated E-cadherin expression; Also, DZNep
decreased the protein expressions of EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and H3K27me3; Moreover,
DZNep could inhibit MGC-803 cell invasive and migrative abilities, as well as
MMP9 expression. These results suggest DZNep raises miR-200c expression to delay 
the invasion and migration of gastric carcinoma cells, and the underlying
mechanisms involve the regulations of EMT-related proteins and polycomb
repressive complex 2.

PMID: 25672630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;7(12):4951-8. eCollection 2014.

TNF-a induced epithelial mesenchymal transition increases stemness properties in 
renal cell carcinoma cells.

Zhang L(1), Jiao M(2), Wu K(1), Li L(1), Zhu G(1), Wang X(1), He D(1), Wu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University Xi'an 710061, China. (2)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University Xi'an 710061, China.

OBJECTIVE: Emerging evidence suggest that the acquisition of epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and induction of cancer stem cell (CSC) or cancer
stem-like cell phenotype are interrelated and contribute to tumor recurrence and 
drug resistance. The aim of this study is to shed light on the relationship
between EMT and CSCs by using renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cell line, ACHN and
786-0.
METHODS: RCC cells were treated with 50 ng/ml of TNF-a for 14 days. To evaluate
EMT, morphological changes were assessed by light microscopy. RT-PCR and Western 
blot for EMT-related markers. On TNF-a treated and untreated RCC cells, we
performed stemness tests and stemness markers expression.
RESULTS: TNF-a treated ACHN cell lost its epithelial morphology assuming a
fibroblast-like appearance. The same results were obtained for the 786-0 cells.
RT-PCR and Western blot showed up-regulation of Vimentin and down-regulation of
E-cadherin in TNF-a treated ACHN and 786-0 cells. Slug and ZEB1 mRNA transcripts 
were up-regulated in TNF-a treated RCC cells confirming EMT. This two cell line
also showed overexpression of Oct4, Nanog, and Bmi-1, all genes of stemness. In
addition, in TNF-a treated RCC cell, an increased tumorsphere-forming capacity
was detectable.
CONCLUSIONS: The induction of EMT by TNF-a exposure, in RCC cell results in the
acquisition of mesenchymal profile and in the expression of stemness markers.

PMCID: PMC4307439
PMID: 25663992  [PubMed]


249. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 8;34(41):5229-39. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.449. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Mitochondrial SOD2 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cell
populations defined by differential CD44 expression.

Kinugasa H(1,)(2,)(3), Whelan KA(1,)(2), Tanaka K(1,)(2), Natsuizaka
M(1,)(2,)(4), Long A(1,)(2), Guo A(1,)(2), Chang S(1,)(2), Kagawa S(1,)(2),
Srinivasan S(5), Guha M(5), Yamamoto K(3), St Clair DK(6), Avadhani NG(5), Diehl 
JA(2,)(7), Nakagawa H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama, Japan. (4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan. (5)Department of Animal Biology and Mari Lowe Center 
for Comparative Oncology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (6)Department of Toxicology and Cancer
Biology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, KY, USA.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) promotes cancer cell invasion, metastasis
and treatment failure. EMT may be activated in cancer cells by reactive oxygen
species (ROS). EMT may promote conversion of a subset of cancer cells from a
CD44(low)-CD24(high) (CD44L) epithelial phenotype to a CD44(high)-CD24(-/low)
(CD44H) mesenchymal phenotype, the latter associated with increased malignant
properties of cancer cells. ROS are required for cells undergoing EMT, although
excessive ROS may induce cell death or senescence; however, little is known as to
how cellular antioxidant capabilities may be regulated during EMT. Mitochondrial 
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) is frequently overexpressed in oral and esophageal 
cancers. Here, we investigate mechanisms of SOD2 transcriptional regulation in
EMT, as well as the functional role of this antioxidant in EMT. Using
well-characterized genetically engineered oral and esophageal human epithelial
cell lines coupled with RNA interference and flow cytometric approaches, we find 
that transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß stimulates EMT, resulting in conversion
of CD44L to CD44H cells, the latter of which display SOD2 upregulation. SOD2
induction in transformed keratinocytes was concurrent with suppression of
TGF-ß-mediated induction of both ROS and senescence. SOD2 gene expression
appeared to be transcriptionally regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B and ZEB2, but not ZEB1.
Moreover, SOD2-mediated antioxidant activity may restrict conversion of CD44L
cells to CD44H cells at the early stages of EMT. These data provide novel
mechanistic insights into the dynamic expression of SOD2 during EMT. In addition,
we delineate a functional role for SOD2 in EMT via the influence of this
antioxidant upon distinct CD44L and CD44H subsets of cancer cells that have been 
implicated in oral and esophageal tumor biology.

PMCID: PMC4530096 [Available on 2016-04-08]
PMID: 25659582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Apr;14(4):1024-34. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0771. Epub
2015 Feb 5.

Targeting Integrin-Linked Kinase Suppresses Invasion and Metastasis through
Downregulation of Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition in Renal Cell Carcinoma.

Han KS(1), Li N(2), Raven PA(2), Fazli L(2), Ettinger S(2), Hong SJ(3), Gleave
ME(2), So AI(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urologic Science, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Department of Urology and 
Urological Science Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urologic Science,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Urology and Urological Science Institute, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of
Urologic Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. dralanso@mail.ubc.ca.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common malignancy in the kidney.
Antiangiogenic targeted therapies inhibit the progression of RCC, but have
limited impacts on invasion or metastasis of tumor cells. Integrin-linked kinase 
(ILK) is a serine/threonine kinase implicated in the regulation of cell
growth/survival, cell-cycle progression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
invasion/migration, and angiogenesis. However, the role of ILK in RCC has not
been evaluated. We investigated the role of ILK on cancer progression and
metastasis and the therapeutic potential of ILK inhibition in RCC. Our
investigation reveals that ILK is expressed at a low level in normal cells and
low-stage RCC cells and is highly expressed in advanced and metastatic cells.
Caki-1, a metastatic RCC cell line, showed higher expression of molecular EMT
markers, including Snail and Zeb1, but decreased activity of GSK3ß. Knockdown of 
ILK using small interference (si)-ILK minimally inhibited tumor proliferation and
cell-cycle progression was not significantly affected. However, ILK knockdown
suppressed the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions and impeded
phenotypic EMT markers, including cell migration and invasion, in Caki-1 and
UMRC-3 cells. Finally, in vivo knockdown of ILK suppressed the progression,
invasion, and metastasis of primary RCC in nude mice by downregulation of EMT
markers (Snail, Zeb1, vimentin, and E-cadherin). Our results show that ILK may be
essential for invasion and metastasis in RCC and regulates vimentin and
E-cadherin expression by regulating the EMT-related transcription factors Snail
and Zeb1. These results suggest that ILK may be a potential target in RCC.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25657336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. EMBO Rep. 2015 Mar;16(3):321-31. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439333. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Zeb1 affects epithelial cell adhesion by diverting glycosphingolipid metabolism.

Mathow D(1), Chessa F(1), Rabionet M(2), Kaden S(1), Jennemann R(1), Sandhoff
R(2), Gröne HJ(3), Feuerborn A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology,
Lipid Pathobiochemistry Group German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany h.-j.groene@dkfz-heidelberg.de
alexander.feuerborn@path.ox.ac.uk. (4)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Pathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Sir William 
Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
h.-j.groene@dkfz-heidelberg.de alexander.feuerborn@path.ox.ac.uk.

This study proposes that the transcription factor Zeb1 modulates epithelial cell 
adhesion by diverting glycosphingolipid metabolism. Zeb1 promotes expression of
a-series glycosphingolipids via regulating expression of GM3 synthase (St3gal5), 
which mechanistically involves Zeb1 binding to the St3gal5 promoter as well as
suppressing microRNA-mediated repression of St3gal5. Functionally, the repression
of St3gal5 suffices to elevate intercellular adhesion and expression of distinct 
junction-associated proteins, reminiscent of knockdown of Zeb1. Conversely,
overexpressing St3gal5 sensitizes cells towards TGF-ß1-induced disruption of
cell-cell interaction and partially antagonizes elevation of intercellular
adhesion imposed by Zeb1 knockdown. These results highlight a direct connection
of glycosphingolipid metabolism and epithelial cell adhesion via Zeb1.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4364871
PMID: 25643708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Med Sci Monit. 2015 Feb 2;21:383-9. doi: 10.12659/MSM.893412.

MiR-429 inhibits oral squamous cell carcinoma growth by targeting ZEB1.

Lei W(1), Liu YE(2), Zheng Y(3), Qu L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, People's Hospital of Mianzhu, Mianzhu, Sichuan,
China (mainland). (2)New Era Stroke Care and Research Institute, The PLA Second
Artillery General Hospital, Beijing, China (mainland). (3)Department of Oncology,
Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, Chengdu, Sichuan, China (mainland).
(4)Department of Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Chengdu Military
Region, Chengdu, Sichuan, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the sixth most common human
malignancy worldwide. To develop new therapeutics requires elucidation of the
underlying mechanism of OSCC pathogenesis. The role of miR-429 in OSCC remains
unknown.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The level of miR-429 and ZEB1 in OSCC tissues and cell lines
was measured by qRT-PCR. MiR-429 was down-regulated by miRNAs antisense
oligonucleotides (ASO) transfection and up-regulated by miRNAs mimics. Cell
proliferation was analyzed by MTT assay. Cell apoptosis was revealed by FACS
analysis. Targeted genes were predicted by a bioinformatics algorithm and
confirmed by a dual luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: MiR-429 was down-regulated in OSCC tissues, and miR-429 overexpression
inhibited OSCC cell lines growth and vice versa. Further, we found that miR-429
could inhibit zinc finger E-boxbinding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) expression, and that
miR-429 and ZEB1 expression in OSCC tissues were negatively correlated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate the tumor suppressor role of miR-429 in OSCC,
and may provide a potential therapeutic target that warrants further
investigation.

PMCID: PMC4324578
PMID: 25640197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3694-708.

Interleukin-27 re-educates intratumoral myeloid cells and down-regulates stemness
genes in non-small cell lung cancer.

Airoldi I(1), Tupone MG(2,)(3), Esposito S(2,)(3), Russo MV(2,)(3), Barbarito
G(1), Cipollone G(4,)(5), Di Carlo E(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, Istituto "Giannina Gaslini", Genova 16147, Italy.
(2)Anatomic Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine and Sciences
of Aging, "G. d'Annunzio" University, Chieti 66100, Italy. (3)Ce.S.I. Biotech,
Aging Research Center, "G. d'Annunzio" University Foundation, Chieti 66100,
Italy. (4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Sciences, "G. d'Annunzio"
University, Chieti 66100, Italy. (5)General and Thoracic Surgery, "SS Annunziata"
Hospital, Chieti 66100, Italy.

Current therapies for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) still fail to
significantly increase its survival rate. Here we asked whether
Interleukin(IL)-27, which has revealed powerful antitumor activity and is
toxicity-free in humans, is a promising therapeutic choice for NSCLC patients.
IL-27's effects were tested on Adenocarcinoma (AC) and Squamous Cell Carcinoma
(SCC) cell lines and xenograft models. IL-27Receptor(R) expression was assessed
in lung tissues from 78 NSCLC patients. In vitro, IL-27 was ineffective on cancer
cell proliferation or apoptosis, but fostered CXCL3/GRO<U+03B3>/MIP2ß expression. In
vitro and in vivo, IL-27 down-regulated stemness-related genes, namely SONIC
HEDGEHOG in AC cells, and OCT4A, SOX2, NOTCH1, KLF4 along with Nestin,
SNAI1/SNAIL, SNAI2/SLUG and ZEB1, in SCC cells. In vivo, IL-27 hampered both AC
and SCC tumor growth in association with a prominent granulocyte- and
macrophage-driven colliquative necrosis, CXCL3 production, and a reduced
pluripotency- and EMT-related gene expression. Myeloablation of tumor-bearing
hosts mostly abolished IL-27's antitumor effects. In clinical samples, IL-27R
expression was found in AC, SCC, pre-cancerous lesions and tumor infiltrating
myeloid cells, and correlated with advanced stages of disease. Our data suggest
that even immunocompromised or advancer NSCLC patients may benefit from IL-27's
antitumor properties based on its ability to drive myeloid cells towards
antitumor activities, and down-regulate stemness- and EMT-related genes in cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC4414147
PMID: 25638163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 30;10(1):e0116747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116747.
eCollection 2015.

A critical dose of doxorubicin is required to alter the gene expression profiles 
in MCF-7 cells acquiring multidrug resistance.

Tsou SH(1), Chen TM(2), Hsiao HT(1), Chen YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, College of 
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
(3)Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, College of 
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of
Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Cellular mechanisms of multidrug resistance (MDR) are related to ABC
transporters, apoptosis, antioxidation, drug metabolism, DNA repair and cell
proliferation. It remains unclear whether the process of resistance development
is programmable. We aimed to study gene expression profiling circumstances in
MCF-7 during MDR development. Eleven MCF-7 sublines with incremental doxorubicin 
resistance were established as a valued tool to study resistance progression. MDR
marker P-gp was overexpressed only in cells termed MCF-7/ADR-1024 under the
selection dose approaching 1024 nM. MCF-7/ADR-1024 and authentic MCF-7/ADR shared
common features in cell morphology and DNA ploidy status. MCF-7/ADR-1024 and
authentic MCF-7/ADR down regulated repair genes BRCA1/2 and wild type p53,
apoptosis-related gene Bcl-2 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
epithelial marker gene E-cadherin. While detoxifying enzymes glutathione-S
transferase-p and protein kinase C-a were up-regulated. The genes involving in
EMT mesenchymal formation were also overexpressed, including N-cadherin, vimentin
and the E-cadherin transcription reppressors Slug, Twist and ZEB1/2. PI3K/AKT
inhibitor wortmannin suppressed expression of Slug, Twist and mdr1. Mutant p53
with a deletion at codons 127-133 markedly appeared in MCF-7/ADR-1024 and
authentic MCF-7/ADR as well. In addition, MCF-7/ADR-1024 cells exerted CSC-like
cell surface marker CD44 high/CD24 low and form mammospheres. Overall, results
suggest that resistance marker P-gp arises owing to turn on/off or mutation of
the genes involved in DNA repair, apoptosis, detoxifying enzymes, EMT and ABC
transporters at a turning point (1.024 µM doxorubicin challenge). Behind this
point, no obvious alterations were found in most tested genes. Selection for
CSC-like cells under this dose may importantly attribute to propagation of the
population presenting invasive properties and drug resistance. We thereby suggest
two models in the induction of drug resistance. Model 1: Selection for CSC-like
cells. Model 2: Mutations for gain-of resistance. Either model 1 or model 2
requires doxorubicin dose approaching 1 µM to alter gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC4312059
PMID: 25635866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Dent Res. 2015 Mar;94(3 Suppl):59S-69S. doi: 10.1177/0022034514568197. Epub
2015 Jan 28.

Upregulation of gingival tissue miR-200b in obese periodontitis subjects.

Kalea AZ(1), Hoteit R(2), Suvan J(3), Lovering RC(2), Palmen J(2), Cooper JA(2), 
Khodiyar VK(2), Harrington Z(4), Humphries SE(2), D'Aiuto F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Cardiovascular Science,
University College London, London, UK a.kalea@ucl.ac.uk. (2)Centre for
Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College 
London, London, UK. (3)Unit of Periodontology, Eastman Dental Institute,
University College London, London, UK. (4)Peninsula School of Dentistry, Plymouth
University, Plymouth, UK.

Increased local immune and inflammatory responses in obese individuals with
periodontitis may explain the aggressive clinical presentation and altered
treatment response when compared to that of normal weight subjects. Our goal was 
to identify any differences in microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of gingival
tissue in periodontitis when obesity is present, which may suggest novel
molecular pathways that this miRNA network may affect. Total RNA was extracted
from gingival tissue biopsies collected from normal weight and obese individuals 
with periodontitis; miRNA expression profiling was performed with Affymetrix
GeneChip miRNA 3.0 arrays; and results were validated with quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). In silico identification of
previously confirmed miRNA gene targets was conducted through miRTarBase and
miRWalk databases, and pathway enrichment analysis identified enriched miRNA gene
sets. Expression of selected genes in the same biopsy samples was tested with
qRT-PCR. The gingival tissue miRNA profile of obese patients, compared to that of
normal weight patients, showed 13 upregulated and 22 downregulated miRNAs, among 
which miR-200b was validated by qRT-PCR to be significantly increased in obesity.
Functional analysis of 51 experimentally validated miR-200b gene targets
identified enrichment of genes involved in cell motility, differentiation, DNA
binding, response to stimulus, and vasculature development pathways not
previously identified in the obesity-specific disease profile. Furthermore, the
expression of the miR-200b gene targets ZEB1/2, GATA2, and KDR was confirmed by
qRT-PCR as being lower in obese patients with periodontitis versus normal weight 
patients, suggesting a role of miR-200b in regulation of a set of gene targets
and biological pathways relevant to wound healing and angiogenesis. Functional
studies to explore the role of miR-200b in the above processes may offer new
insights on putative therapeutic targets for this group of patients.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research.

PMCID: PMC4541096
PMID: 25630869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2015 Sep;122(9):1289-301. doi:
10.1007/s00702-015-1366-8. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Genomic structural variants are linked with intellectual disability.

Bulayeva K(1), Lesch KP, Bulayev O, Walsh C, Glatt S, Gurgenova F, Omarova J,
Berdichevets I, Thompson PM.

Author information: 
(1)N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Gubkin str. 3, Moscow, 119991, Russia, bulaeva@vigg.ru.

Mutations in more than 500 genes have been associated with intellectual
disability (ID) and related disorders of cognitive function, such as autism and
schizophrenia. Here we aimed to unravel the molecular epidemiology of
non-specific ID in a genetic isolate using a combination of population and
molecular genetic approaches. A large multigenerational pedigree was ascertained 
within a Dagestan Genetic Heritage research program in a genetic isolate of
indigenous ethnics. Clinical characteristics of the affected members were based
on combining diagnoses from regional psychiatric hospitals with our own clinical 
assessment, using a Russian translation of the structured psychiatric interviews,
the Diagnostic Interview for Genetic Studies and the Family Interview for Genetic
Studies, based on DSM-IV criteria. Weber/CHLC 9.0 STRs set was used for
multipoint parametric linkage analyses (Simwalk2.91). Next, we checked CNVs and
LOH (based on Affymetrix SNP 5.0 data) in the linked with ID genomic regions with
the aim to identify candidate genes associated with mutations in linked regions. 
The number of statistically significant (p = 0.05) suggestive linkage peaks with 
1.3 < LOD < 3.0 we detected in a total of 10 genomic regions: 1q41, 2p25.3-p24.2,
3p13-p12.1, 4q13.3, 10p11, 11q23, 12q24.22-q24.31, 17q24.2-q25.1, 21q22.13 and
22q12.3-q13.1. Three significant linkage signals with LOD >3 were obtained at
2p25.3-p24.2 under the dominant model, with a peak at 21 cM flanked by loci
D2S2976 and D2S2952; at 12q24.22-q24.31 under the recessive model, with a peak at
-120 cM flanked by marker D12S2070 and D12S395 and at 22q12.3 under the dominant 
model, with a peak at 32 cM flanked by marker D22S683 and D22S445. After a set of
genes had been designated as possible candidates in these specific chromosomal
regions,we conducted an exploratory search for LOH and CNV based on microarray
data to detect structural genomic variants within five ID-linked regions with LOD
scores between 2.0 and 3.9. In these selected regions we obtained 173 ROH
segments and 98 CN segments. Further analysis of region 2p25.3-p24.2 revealed
deletions within genes encoding MYTL, SNTG2 and TPO among five of 21 affected
cases at 2p25.3-p24.2. In the ID-linked region at 12q24.22-12q24.31 19 out of 21 
ID cases carried segmental CNV and 20 of 21 them displayed ROH segments with mean
size lengths for ID cases 2512 kb (500-6,472 kb) and for healthy control 682 kb
(531-986 kb), including the genes MED13L, HRK, FBXW8, TESC, CDK2AP1 and SBNO1.
Seven of 21 affected pedigree members displayed segmental deletions at 22q12.3
that includes the gene LARGE. Eight affected pedigree members carried ROH
segments and 6 CN segments at 10p11.23-p11.21 containing the genes ZEB1, c10orf68
and EPC1. Our linkage and structural genomic variation analyses in a remote
highland genetic isolate with aggregation of ID demonstrated that even highly
isolated single kindred ID has oligo/polygenic pathogenesis. The results obtained
implicate 10 genomic regions linked with ID that contain some of previously
reported candidate genes, including HRK, FBXW8, TESC, CDK2AP1 and SBNO1 at 12q24 
that were shown in recent studies as associated with brain measures derived from 
MRI scans.

PMCID: PMC4517986 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25626716  [PubMed - in process]


257. Breast J. 2015 Mar-Apr;21(2):155-60. doi: 10.1111/tbj.12388. Epub 2015 Jan 27.

Relationship between circulating tumor cells, blood coagulation, and
urokinase-plasminogen-activator system in early breast cancer patients.

Mego M(1), Karaba M, Minarik G, Benca J, Sedlácková T, Tothova L, Vlkova B,
Cierna Z, Janega P, Luha J, Gronesova P, Pindak D, Fridrichova I, Celec P, Reuben
JM, Cristofanilli M, Mardiak J.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Medical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, 
Bratislava, Slovakia; Translational Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius 
University, Bratislava, Slovakia; National Cancer Institute, Bratislava,
Slovakia.

Cancer is a risk factor for venous thromboembolism (VTE) and plasma d-dimer (DD) 
and tissue factor (TF) are established VTE associated markers. Circulating tumor 
cells (CTCs) are associated with the risk of VTE in metastatic breast cancer.
This study aimed to correlate CTCs, blood coagulation and the urokinase
plasminogen activator (uPA) system in primary breast cancer (PBC) patients. This 
prospective study included 116 PBC patients treated by primary surgery. CTCs were
detected by quantitative RT-PCR assay for expression of epithelial (CK19) or
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes (TWIST1, SNAIL1, SLUG, ZEB1,
FOXC2). Plasma DD, TF, uPA system proteins were detected by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays, while expressions of uPA system in surgical specimens were 
evaluated by immunohistochemistry. CTCs were detected in 27.6% patients. Patients
with CTCs had a significantly higher mean plasma DD (ng/mL) than those of
patients without CTCs (632.4 versus 365.4, p = 0.000004). There was no
association between plasma TF and CTCs. Epithelial CTCs exhibit higher expression
of uPA system genes compared to EMT_CTCs. Patients with CTCs had higher plasma
uPA proteins than those of patients without CTCs; there was no correlation
between tissue expression of uPA system, CTCs, DD or TF levels. In multivariate
analysis CTCs and patients age were independent factors associated with plasma
DD. We found association between plasma DD and CTCs indicating a potential role
for activation of the coagulation cascade in the early metastatic process. CTCs
could be directly involved in coagulation activation or increased CTCs could be
marker of aggressive disease and increased VTE risk.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25623304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Apr;26(4):351-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2014.11.009. Epub
2014 Dec 30.

Coordinative modulation of human zinc transporter 2 gene expression through
active and suppressive regulators.

Lu YJ(1), Liu YC(1), Lin MC(1), Chen YT(1), Lin LY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Department of Life Science,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology and Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan. Electronic address: lylin@life.nthu.edu.tw.

Zinc transporter 2 (ZnT2) is one of the cellular factors responsible for Zn
homeostasis. Upon Zn overload, ZnT2 reduces cellular Zn by transporting it into
excretory vesicles. We investigated the molecular mechanism that regulates human 
ZnT2 (hZnT2) gene expression. Zn induces hZnT2 expression in dose- and
time-dependent manners. Overexpression of metal-responsive transcription factor 1
(MTF-1) increases hZnT2 transcription, whereas depletion of MTF-1 reduces hZnT2
expression. There are five putative metal response elements (MREs) within 1kb
upstream of the hZnT2 gene. A serial deletion of the hZnT2 promoter region (from 
5' to 3') shows that the two MREs proximal to the gene are essential for
Zn-induced promoter activity. Further mutation analysis concludes that the
penultimate MRE (MREb) supports the metal-induced promoter activity. The hZnT2
promoter has also a zinc finger E-box binding homeobox (ZEB) binding element.
Mutation or deletion of this ZEB binding element elevates the basal and
Zn-induced hZnT2 promoter activities. Knockdown of ZEB1 mRNA enhances the hZnT2
transcript level in HEK-293 cells. In MCF-7 (ZEB-deficient) cells, expression of 
ZEB proteins attenuates the Zn-induced hZnT2 expression. However, expressions of 
MTF-1 target genes such as human ZnT1 and metallothionein IIA were not affected. 
Our study shows the expression of the hZnT2 gene is coordinately regulated via
active and suppressive modulators.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25618524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Hum Reprod. 2015 Mar;30(3):507-18. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev001. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

MicroRNA-429 functions as a regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition by
targeting Pcdh8 during murine embryo implantation.

Li Z(1), Gou J(2), Jia J(2), Zhao X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, West China Second University
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, People's Republic of China Sichuan 
Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, West China Second University Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, People's Republic of China
zhengyuli@scu.edu.cn. (2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, West China
Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, People's Republic
of China. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, West China Second
University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, People's Republic of
China Sichuan Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, West China Second
University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, People's Republic of
China.

STUDY QUESTION: What is the role of miR-429 in murine embryo implantation?
SUMMARY ANSWER: miR-429 functions as a suppressor of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) during the process of embryo implantation by reverse regulation 
of Pcdh8.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) may serve as promising regulators of
embryo implantation. miR-429 was recently found to be down-regulated during
embryo implantation period in a microarray analysis.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: The expression profile of miR-429 was clarified in 
a series of models, and the target gene was confirmed. The in vivo and in vitro
effect of miR-429 on embryo implantation was examined.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Pregnancy was produced by natural
mating between female C57BL6/J mice and male mice, and a series of models,
including pseudopregnancy, delayed implantation and artificial decidualization,
were established. The expression profile of miR-429 during the embryo
implantation period was clarified in these models. Candidate target genes of
miR-429 were predicted by bioinformatic analysis and tested by luciferase
activity assay. The in vivo effects of miR-429 on embryo implantation were also
examined. The in vitro effects of miR-429 on EMT were studied by examining
migratory and invasive capacities by transwell assay and expression profiles of
cadherin family members by western blotting and qRT-PCR.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: The expression profile of miR-429 in animal 
models suggested its down-regulation should be dependent on the presence and
status of blastocysts and on endometrial decidualization. The luciferase activity
assay showed that Pcdh8, a member of cadherin gene family, was the target gene of
miR-429, and miR-429 suppressed the expression of Pcdh8 mRNA and protein.
Gain-of-function of miR-429 in vivo resulted in a significant reduction of the
number of implantation sites, but had little effect on fertilization.
Up-regulation of miR-429 in vitro led to suppression of mesenchymal marker genes 
Vim, Cdh2, Zeb1 and Zeb2, and activation of epithelial marker gene Cdh1,
resulting in suppression of the migratory and invasive capacities of cells.
miR-429 also partially abrogated TGF-beta-induced EMT. The dysregulated
expression profiles of EMT markers during embryo implantation period could be
partially reversed by gain-of-function of miR-429 in vivo.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The association of miR-429 with other members
of the miR-200 family in embryo implantation remains to be determined. The
relationship between miR-429 and the cadherin family needs more intensive
description and the detailed mechanism of miR-429 in regulating the cadherin
family needs to be elucidated.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our findings indicate that miR-429 plays a
major role in embryo implantation as a suppressor of EMT by targeting Pcdh8. This
information could contribute to a better understanding of the mechanisms involved
in the miRNA-mediated regulation of embryo implantation, and subsequently improve
treatments for infertility. The findings are consistent with that from previous
research of the other members in miR-200 family in embryo implantation and in the
EMT.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This study was supported by the Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant number: 81170592), and Special Fund from
National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation (Grant number: 201079). There was no
conflict of interest.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25609238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(4):481-7. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1006048.

ZEB1: at the crossroads of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, metastasis and
therapy resistance.

Zhang P(1), Sun Y, Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology.

Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a transcription factor that
promotes tumor invasion and metastasis by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in carcinoma cells. EMT not only plays an important role in
embryonic development and malignant progression, but is also implicated in cancer
therapy resistance. It has been hypothesized that carcinoma cells that have
undergone EMT acquire cancer stem cell properties including self-renewal,
chemoresistance and radioresistance. However, our recent data indicate that ZEB1 
regulates radioresistance in breast cancer cells through an EMT-independent
mechanism. In this Perspective, we review different mechanisms by which ZEB1
regulates tumor progression and treatment resistance. Based on studies by us and 
others, we propose that it is specific EMT inducers like ZEB1, but not the
epithelial or mesenchymal state itself, that dictate cancer stem cell properties.

PMCID: PMC4614883
PMID: 25607528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):3240-53.

KITENIN promotes glioma invasiveness and progression, associated with the
induction of EMT and stemness markers.

Lee KH(1), Ahn EJ(2), Oh SJ(1), Kim O(1), Joo YE(3), Bae JA(4), Yoon S(4), Ryu
HH(2), Jung S(2), Kim KK(4), Lee JH(1), Moon KS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital and
Medical School, Hwasun, Jeollanam-do, South Korea. (2)Department of Neurosurgery,
Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital and Medical School, Hwasun,
Jeollanam-do, South Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam National
University Hwasun Hospital and Medical School, Hwasun, Jeollanam-do, South Korea.
(4)Medical Research Center of Gene Regulation and Center for Creative Biomedical 
Scientists, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, South Korea.

KITENIN (KAI1 COOH-terminal interacting tetraspanin) promotes tumor invasion and 
metastasis in various cancers. This study assessed the association between
KITENIN expression and advanced glioma grade in patients. In vitro assays
revealed that KITENIN knockdown inhibited the invasion and migration of glioma
cells, whereas KITENIN overexpression promoted their invasion and migration. In
orthotopic mouse tumor models, mice transplanted with KITENIN-transfected glioma 
cells had significantly shorter survival than mice transplanted with
mock-transfected cells. Patients with low KITENIN expression showed a
significantly longer progression-free survival than patients with high KITENIN
expression. KITENIN induced the expression of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) markers (N-cadherin, ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL and SLUG) as well as the 
glioma stemness markers (CD133, ALDH1 and EPH-B1). Taken together, these findings
showed that high levels of KITENIN increased glioma invasiveness and progression,
associated with the up-regulation of EMT and stemness markers.

PMCID: PMC4413650
PMID: 25605251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 15;75(6):1009-20. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0681. Epub
2015 Jan 19.

ß-arrestin-1 mediates nicotine-induced metastasis through E2F1 target genes that 
modulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Pillai S(1), Trevino J(2), Rawal B(3), Singh S(4), Kovacs M(1), Li X(5), Schell
M(6), Haura E(5), Bepler G(7), Chellappan S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida. (2)Department of Surgery, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida. (3)Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida. (4)National
Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, West Bengal, India. (5)Department of
Thoracic Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida. (6)Department of
Biostatistics, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampla, Florida. (7)Barbara Ann Karmanos
Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan. (8)Department of Tumor Biology, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida.
Srikumar.Chellappan@moffitt.org.

Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor in the development of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), which accounts for 80% of all lung cancers. Nicotine, the
major addictive component of tobacco smoke, can induce proliferation, invasion,
and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in NSCLC cell lines and promote
metastasis of NSCLC in mice. Here, we demonstrate that the scaffolding protein
ß-arrestin-1 is necessary for nicotine-mediated induction of mesenchymal genes
vimentin and fibronectin as well as EMT regulators ZEB1 and ZEB2. Nicotine
induced changes in cell morphology and ablate tight junctions consistent with
EMT; ß-arrestin-1, but not ß-arrestin-2, was required for these changes.
ß-Arrestin-1 promoted the expression of the mesenchymal genes, as well as ZEB1
and ZEB2, through the mediation of the E2F1 transcription factor; this required
Src kinase activity. Stimulation of multiple NSCLC cell lines with nicotine led
to enhanced recruitment of ß-arrestin-1 and E2F1 on vimentin, fibronectin, and
ZEB1 and ZEB2 promoters. Furthermore, there was significantly more ß-arrestin-1
and E2F1 associated with these promoters in human NSCLC tumors, and ß-arrestin-1 
levels correlated with vimentin and fibronectin levels in human NSCLC samples.
A549-luciferase cells lacking ß-arrestin-1 showed a significantly reduced
capacity for tumor growth and metastasis when orthotopically implanted into the
lungs of SCID-beige mice. Taken together, these studies reveal a novel role for
ß-arrestin-1 in the growth and metastasis of NSCLC.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4359962
PMID: 25600647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Genes Dev. 2015 Jan 15;29(2):171-83. doi: 10.1101/gad.253591.114.

ATDC induces an invasive switch in KRAS-induced pancreatic tumorigenesis.

Wang L(1), Yang H(1), Abel EV(1), Ney GM(2), Palmbos PL(3), Bednar F(4), Zhang
Y(4), Leflein J(1), Waghray M(1), Owens S(5), Wilkinson JE(6), Prasad J(7),
Ljungman M(7), Rhim AD(8), Pasca di Magliano M(9), Simeone DM(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Translational Oncology Program. (2)Translational
Oncology Program, Department of Pediatrics. (3)Translational Oncology Program,
Department of Internal Medicine. (4)Department of Surgery. (5)Department of
Pathology. (6)Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine. (7)Translational Oncology
Program, Department of Radiation Oncology, Department of Molecular and
Integrative Physiology. (8)Department of Internal Medicine. (9)Department of
Surgery, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (10)Department of Surgery, Translational Oncology
Program, Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology,
simeone@med.umich.edu.

The initiation of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is linked to activating 
mutations in KRAS. However, in PDA mouse models, expression of oncogenic mutant
KRAS during development gives rise to tumors only after a prolonged latency or
following induction of pancreatitis. Here we describe a novel mouse model
expressing ataxia telangiectasia group D complementing gene (ATDC, also known as 
TRIM29 [tripartite motif 29]) that, in the presence of oncogenic KRAS,
accelerates pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) formation and the
development of invasive and metastatic cancers. We found that ATDC up-regulates
CD44 in mouse and human PanIN lesions via activation of ß-catenin signaling,
leading to the induction of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
phenotype characterized by expression of Zeb1 and Snail1. We show that ATDC is
up-regulated by oncogenic Kras in a subset of PanIN cells that are capable of
invading the surrounding stroma. These results delineate a novel molecular
pathway for EMT in pancreatic tumorigenesis, showing that ATDC is a proximal
regulator of EMT.

© 2015 Wang et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4298136
PMID: 25593307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cancer Lett. 2015 Apr 1;359(1):107-16. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.01.010. Epub
2015 Jan 12.

Hypoxia enhances migration and invasion in glioblastoma by promoting a
mesenchymal shift mediated by the HIF1a-ZEB1 axis.

Joseph JV(1), Conroy S(2), Pavlov K(1), Sontakke P(3), Tomar T(4), Eggens-Meijer 
E(5), Balasubramaniyan V(5), Wagemakers M(6), den Dunnen WF(2), Kruyt FA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department
of Pathology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Experimental
Hematology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Gynecologic
Oncology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Neuroscience, 
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 
GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Neuro-surgery, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, 
The Netherlands. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: f.a.e.kruyt@umcg.nl.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common brain tumor in adults and the mesenchymal
GBM subtype was reported to be the most malignant, presenting severe hypoxia and 
necrosis. Here, we investigated the possible role of a hypoxic microenvironment
for inducing a mesenchymal and invasive phenotype. The exposure of
non-mesenchymal SNB75 and U87 cells to hypoxia induced a strong change in cell
morphology that was accompanied by enhanced invasive capacity and the acquisition
of mesenchymal marker expression. Further analyses showed the induction of HIF1a 
and HIF2a by hypoxia and exposure to digoxin, a cardiac glycoside known to
inhibit HIF1/2 expression, was able to prevent hypoxia-induced mesenchymal
transition. ShRNA-mediated knockdown of HIF1a, and not HIF2a, prevented this
transition, as well as the knockdown of the EMT transcription factor ZEB1. We
provide further evidence for a hypoxia-induced mesenchymal shift in GBM primary
material by showing co-localization of GLUT1, ZEB1 and the mesenchymal marker
YKL40 in hypoxic regions of the tumor. Collectively, our results identify a
HIF1a-ZEB1 signaling axis that promotes hypoxia induced mesenchymal shift and
invasion in GBM in a cell line dependent fashion.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25592037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Aug;22(8):1341-52. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.228. Epub 2015
Jan 16.

LAMC2 enhances the metastatic potential of lung adenocarcinoma.

Moon YW(1), Rao G(2), Kim JJ(3), Shim HS(4), Park KS(5), An SS(6), Kim B(7),
Steeg PS(8), Sarfaraz S(9), Changwoo Lee L(9), Voeller D(9), Choi EY(6), Luo
J(9), Palmieri D(8), Chung HC(10), Kim JH(10), Wang Y(5), Giaccone G(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA [2] Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South
Korea. (5)1] Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA [2] Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. (6)Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA. (7)Pathology Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, MD, USA. (8)Women's Cancers Section,
Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (9)Medical Oncology Branch, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(10)Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Lung cancer is the number one cancer killer, and metastasis is the main cause of 
high mortality in lung cancer patients. However, mechanisms underlying the
development of lung cancer metastasis remain unknown. Using genome-wide
transcriptional analysis in an experimental metastasis model, we identified
laminin <U+03B3>2 (LAMC2), an epithelial basement membrane protein, to be significantly 
upregulated in lung adenocarcinoma metastatic cells. Elevated LAMC2 increased
traction force, migration, and invasion of lung adenocarcinoma cells accompanied 
by the induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). LAMC2 knockdown
decreased traction force, migration, and invasion accompanied by EMT reduction in
vitro, and attenuated metastasis in mice. LAMC2 promoted migration and invasion
via EMT that was integrin ß1- and ZEB1-dependent. High LAMC2 was significantly
correlated with the mesenchymal marker vimentin expression in lung
adenocarcinomas, and with higher risk of recurrence or death in patients with
lung adenocarcinoma. We suggest that LAMC2 promotes metastasis in lung
adenocarcinoma via EMT and may be a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4495359 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25591736  [PubMed - in process]


266. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3621-8. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2999-1. Epub 2015 Jan
12.

Involvement of NEDD9 in the invasion and migration of gastric cancer.

Feng J(1), Zhao J, Xie H, Yin Y, Luo G, Zhang J, Feng Y, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First People's Hospital of Changzhou, the
Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Changzhou, 213000, China.

Recent studies have demonstrated that neural precursor cell expressed,
developmentally downregulated 9 (NEDD9) is highly expressed in various tumor
tissues and cell lines. However, research on the role of NEDD9 in gastric cancer 
(GC) is rare, and the potential mechanism in tumor progression has not yet been
explored. In this study, we investigated the role and mechanism of NEDD9 in GC.
The expression of NEDD9 in GC tissues and cell lines was measured by
immunohistochemistry, qRT-PCR, and Western blot, respectively. Inhibiting NEDD9
expression was carried out by siRNA transfection, and upregulating of NEDD9 was
via NEDD9 overexpression plasmid. The ability of proliferation, migration, and
invasion was detected by MTT assay, scratch wound assay, and transwell assay,
respectively. The expression of vimentin, E-cadherin, Zeb1, and Zeb2 was measured
by Western blot and qRT-PCR. We found that NEDD9 expression was dramatically
increased both in GC tissues and cell lines, and the expression was significantly
related to GC development. Knockdown of NEDD9 in SGC-7901 strongly inhibited its 
malignant capacity in vitro. Meanwhile, upregulation of NEDD9 in GES-1 increased 
the malignant capacity. In addition, the expression of vimentin, Zeb1, and Zeb2
was positively correlated with NEDD9, while E-cadherin was opposite.
Collectively, our findings suggest that NEDD9 acts as an oncogene and promotes GC
metastasis via EMT.

PMID: 25577245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Int J Oncol. 2015 Mar;46(3):1232-42. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2813. Epub 2014 Dec
30.

Downregulation of UHRF1 promotes EMT via inducing CXCR4 in human cancer cells.

Jung YD(1), Shim JW(1), Park SJ(1), Choi SH(1), Yang K(1), Heo K(1), Park MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences
(DIRAMS), Busan 619-953, Republic of Korea.

Activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is important for malignant 
tumor progression exhibiting migratory and invasive properties. UHRF1
(ubiquitin-like, with PHD and RING finger domains 1), as an epigenetic regulator,
plays a crucial role in DNA CpG methylation, chromatin remodeling and gene
expression. Many studies demonstrated that UHRF1 is aberrantly expressed in
various types of human cancer. However, the precise role of UHRF1 in human
cancers remains highly controversial. In the present study, we found that
downregulation of UHRF1 enhances the migratory and invasive properties of human
cancer cells by inducing EMT, and that the CXCR4 signaling pathway is strictly
necessary for UHRF1 deficiency-mediated induction of EMT. Downregulation of UHRF1
induced the expression of the EMT-regulating transcription factors, Zeb1, Slug
and Snail and then led to decreased protein level of E-cadherin, and increased
protein level of N-cadherin and vimentin, including increased migratory and
invasive properties of human cancer cells. In addition, siRNA targeting of Zeb1
or Snail effectively attenuated UHRF1 deficiency-induced EMT, but siRNA targeting
of Slug did not, indicating that Zeb1 and Snail play key roles in this event.
Moreover, downregulation of UHRF1 induced the expression of CXCR4 in HepG2 cells.
siRNA targeting of CXCR4 greatly suppressed the UHRF1 deficiency-induced EMT, as 
evidenced by a reversal of expression patterns of Snail and Zeb1, and by reduced 
migratory and invasive properties of HepG2 cells. In conclusion, our results
demonstrate that downregulation of UHRF1 contributes to the induction of EMT in
human cancer cells via the activation of CXCR4 signaling pathway. Our observation
also suggests that UHRF1 may play a pivotal role in suppressing the malignant
alteration of cancer cells.

PMID: 25572953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Oncol Rep. 2015 Mar;33(3):1388-94. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3708. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Inhibitory action of pristimerin on hypoxia-mediated metastasis involves stem
cell characteristics and EMT in PC-3 prostate cancer cells.

Zuo J(1), Guo Y(2), Peng X(1), Tang Y(3), Zhang X(4), He P(1), Li S(1), Wa Q(1), 
Li J(5), Huang S(1), Xu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery/Orthopaedic Research Institute, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. 
China. (2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (4)Department of Sports Medicine, Shenzhen Hospital
of Peking University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518036, P.R. China. (5)Department of
Radiology, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangdong General Hospital,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate whether pristimerin affects the
bone metastasis, stem cell characteristics and epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) of prostate cancer (PCa) PC-3 cells subjected to hypoxia. The PC-3 cells
were cultured under hypoxia or normoxia for 48 h and were then treated with
increasing concentrations of pristimerin from 0 to 0.8 µmol/l, under normoxia.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) was detected by western blotting.
Proliferation was assessed with the CCK-8 assay. Transwell invasion assay was
used to analyze the potency of invasion. Stem cell characteristics were detected 
by sphere formation, colony formation assay and western blotting, including CD44,
KLF4, OCT4 and AGO2, which are stem cell characteristic-related markers. EMT was 
confirmed by the expression changes of EMT-related markers, including N-cadherin,
fibronectin, vimentin and ZEB1, which were evaluated by western blotting. The
addition of pristimerin to the medium reduced the hypoxia-induced PC-3 cell
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. Pristimerin effectively inhibited
hypoxia-induced invasion of the PCa cells in vitro. Moreover, the treatment of
cells with pristimerin induced the reversal of hypoxia-induced stem cell
characteristics and EMT, which was confirmed by sphere formation, colony
formation assay and the expression changes of CSC- and EMT-related markers. The
reversal of hypoxia-induced stem cell characteristics and EMT in the PCa cells by
low-dose pristimerin was dose-dependent. These results showed that treatment with
pristimerin may be a potential strategy for the suppression of hypoxia-induced
metastasis through the reversal of hypoxia-induced stem cell characteristics and 
EMT in cancer cells, which justifies the potential use of pristimerin as a
practical chemopreventive approach for patients with PCa.

PMID: 25571882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Dis Markers. 2014;2014:680361. doi: 10.1155/2014/680361. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

ZEB1 expression in endometrial biopsy predicts lymph node metastases in patient
with endometrial cancer.

Feng G(1), Wang X(2), Cao X(3), Shen L(4), Zhu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wannan Medical 
College, Wuhu, Anhui 241001, China. (2)Department of Pathology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, Anhui 241001, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Wannan Medical
College, Wuhu, Anhui 241001, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Wuhu Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Wuhu, Anhui 241001, China. (5)Molecular
Pathological Laboratory, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Anhui Province,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230001, China.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to analyze the expression of zinc-finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) in endometrial biopsy and its correlation with
preoperative characteristics, including lymph node metastases in patient with
endometrial cancer.
METHODS: Using quantitative RT-PCR, ZEB1 expressions in endometrial biopsy from
452 patients were measured. The relationship between ZEB1 expression and
preoperative characteristics was analyzed.
RESULTS: ZEB1 expressions were significantly associated with subtype, grade,
myometrial invasion, and lymph node metastases. Lymph node metastases could be
identified with a sensitivity of 57.8% at specificity of 74.1% by ZEB1 expression
in endometrial biopsy. Based on combination of preoperative characteristics and
ZEB1 expression, lymph node metastases could be identified with a sensitivity of 
62.1% at specificity of 96.2% prior to hysterectomy.
CONCLUSION: ZEB1 expression in endometrial biopsy could help physicians to better
predict the lymph node metastasis in patients with endometrial cancer prior to
hysterectomy.

PMCID: PMC4269209
PMID: 25544793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Front Oncol. 2014 Dec 9;4:352. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00352. eCollection 2014.

Melanoma cells revive an embryonic transcriptional network to dictate phenotypic 
heterogeneity.

Vandamme N(1), Berx G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Inflammation Research Center , VIB,
Ghent , Belgium ; Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University , 
Ghent , Belgium.

Compared to the overwhelming amount of literature describing how
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducing transcription factors
orchestrate cellular plasticity in embryogenesis and epithelial cells, the
functions of these factors in non-epithelial contexts, such as melanoma, are less
clear. Melanoma is an aggressive tumor arising from melanocytes, endowed with
unique features of cellular plasticity. The reversible phenotype-switching
between differentiated and invasive phenotypes is increasingly appreciated as a
mechanism accounting for heterogeneity in melanoma and is driven by oncogenic
signaling and environmental cues. This phenotypic switch is coupled with an
intriguing and somewhat counterintuitive signaling switch of EMT-inducing
transcription factors. In contrast to carcinomas, different EMT-inducing
transcription factors have antagonizing effects in melanoma. Balancing between
these different EMT transcription factors is likely the key to successful
metastatic spread of melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4260490
PMID: 25538895  [PubMed]


271. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 10;6(4):2496-508.

Clinically relevant genes and regulatory pathways associated with NRASQ61
mutations in melanoma through an integrative genomics approach.

Jiang W(1), Jia P(1,)(2), Hutchinson KE(3), Johnson DB(4,)(5), Sosman JA(4,)(5), 
Zhao Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (2)Center for Quantitative Sciences,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (4)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (5)Department of
Medicine/Division of Hematology-Oncology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Therapies such as BRAF inhibitors have become standard treatment for melanoma
patients whose tumors harbor activating BRAFV600 mutations. However, analogous
therapies for inhibiting NRAS mutant signaling have not yet been well
established. In this study, we performed an integrative analysis of DNA
methylation, gene expression, and microRNA expression data to identify potential 
regulatory pathways associated with the most common driver mutations in NRAS
(Q61K/L/R) through comparison of NRASQ61-mutated melanomas with pan-negative
melanomas. Surprisingly, we found dominant hypomethylation (98.03%) in
NRASQ61-mutated melanomas. We identified 1,150 and 49 differentially expressed
genes and microRNAs, respectively. Integrated functional analyses of alterations 
in all three data types revealed important signaling pathways associated with
NRASQ61 mutations, such as the MAPK pathway, as well as other novel cellular
processes, such as axon guidance. Further analysis of the relationship between
DNA methylation and gene expression changes revealed 9 hypermethylated and
down-regulated genes and 112 hypomethylated and up-regulated genes in NRASQ61
melanomas. Finally, we identified 52 downstream regulatory cascades of three
hypomethylated and up-regulated genes (PDGFD, ZEB1, and THRB). Collectively, our 
observation of predominant gene hypomethylation in NRASQ61 melanomas and the
identification of NRASQ61-linked pathways will be useful for the development of
targeted therapies against melanomas harboring NRASQ61 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4385866
PMID: 25537510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):874-85.

TWIST1 and TWIST2 promoter methylation and protein expression in tumor stroma
influence the epithelial-mesenchymal transition-like tumor budding phenotype in
colorectal cancer.

Galván JA(1), Helbling M(1), Koelzer VH(1,)(2), Tschan MP(3), Berger MD(4),
Hädrich M(5), Schnüriger B(5), Karamitopoulou E(1,)(2), Dawson H(1,)(2),
Inderbitzin D(5,)(6), Lugli A(1,)(2), Zlobec I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Unit (TRU), Institute of Pathology, University of Bern,
Bern 3010, Switzerland. (2)Clinical Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern, Switzerland. (3)Experimental Pathology Division, Institute of
Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. (5)Departments of Visceral Surgery
and Medicine, Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. (6)Department of
Surgery, Tiefenau Hospital, Bern, Switzerland.

Tumor budding in colorectal cancer is likened to an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) characterized predominantly by loss of E-cadherin and
up-regulation of E-cadherin repressors like TWIST1 and TWIST2. Here we
investigate a possible epigenetic link between TWIST proteins and the tumor
budding phenotype. TWIST1 and TWIST2 promoter methylation and protein expression 
were investigated in six cell lines and further correlated with tumor budding in 
patient cohort 1 (n = 185). Patient cohort 2 (n = 112) was used to assess
prognostic effects. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) of tumor epithelium and
stroma from low- and high-grade budding cancers was performed. In colorectal
cancers, TWIST1 and TWIST2 expression was essentially restricted to stromal
cells. LCM results of a high-grade budding case show positive TWIST1 and TWIST2
stroma and no methylation, while the low-grade budding case was characterized by 
negative stroma and strong hypermethylation. TWIST1 stromal cell staining was
associated with adverse features like more advanced pT (p = 0.0044), lymph node
metastasis (p = 0.0301), lymphatic vessel invasion (p = 0.0373), perineural
invasion (p = 0.0109) and worse overall survival time (p = 0.0226). Stromal cells
may influence tumor budding in colorectal cancers through expression of TWIST1.
Hypermethylation of the tumor stroma may represent an alternative mechanism for
regulation of TWIST1.

PMCID: PMC4359262
PMID: 25528769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):862-73.

The ubiquitin ligase Siah is a novel regulator of Zeb1 in breast cancer.

Chen A(1,)(2), Wong CS(3), Liu MC(1), House CM(1), Sceneay J(3), Bowtell
DD(1,)(2,)(4,)(5), Thompson EW(6,)(7,)(8), Möller A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics and Genetics Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St.
Andrews Place, East Melbourne 3002, Australia. (2)Department of Pathology, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Australia. (3)Tumour Microenvironment
Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston 4006, Australia.
(4)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville 3010, Australia. (5)Department of Biochemistry, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Australia. (6)The University of Melbourne Department
of Surgery, St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy 3065, Australia. (7)St Vincent's
Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy 3065, Australia. (8)Institute of Health
and Biomedical Innovation and School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland
University of Technology, Kelvin Grove 4000, Australia.

Elucidating the mechanisms that underlie metastasis is of paramount importance to
understanding tumor progression and to the development of novel therapeutics.
Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) plays a vital role in tumor cell
dissemination and is regulated by a core cassette of transcription factors.
Despite recent advances, the molecular pathways that regulate the EMT program
have not yet been fully delineated. We show that Siah ubiquitin ligases regulate 
Zeb1 protein, a key EMT transcription factor. The induction of EMT in breast
cancer cells leads to the down-regulation of Siah, while the loss of Siah induces
a mesenchymal phenotype, concurrent with an up-regulation of Zeb1. Overexpression
of Siah in vitro mediates Zeb1 degradation, which can be blocked with a Siah
peptide inhibitor. Thus, this work demonstrates that Siah is a novel regulator of
EMT. This work is the first to identify a mechanism of post-translational
regulation of the key Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition transcription factor
Zeb1.

PMCID: PMC4359261
PMID: 25528765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Brain Pathol. 2015 Nov;25(6):724-32. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12240. Epub 2015 Feb 8.

ZEB1 Promotes Invasion in Human Fetal Neural Stem Cells and Hypoxic Glioma
Neurospheres.

Kahlert UD(1,)(2), Suwala AK(2), Raabe EH(1), Siebzehnrubl FA(3), Suarez MJ(1),
Orr BA(4), Bar EE(5), Maciaczyk J(2), Eberhart CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore, MD. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. (3)European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. (4)Anatomical Pathology, St. Jude Children
Research Hospital. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, School of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.

Diffuse spread through brain parenchyma and the presence of hypoxic foci rimmed
by neoplastic cells are two cardinal features of glioblastoma, and low oxygen is 
thought to drive movement of malignant gliomas in the core of the lesions.
Transcription factors associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
have been linked to this invasion, and we found that hypoxia increased in vitro
invasion up to fourfold in glioblastoma neurosphere lines and induced the
expression of ZEB1. Immunohistochemical assessment of 295 surgical specimens
consisting of various types of pediatric and adult brain cancers showed that ZEB1
expression was significantly higher in infiltrative lesions than less invasive
tumors such as pilocytic astrocytoma and ependymoma. ZEB1 protein was also
present in human fetal periventricular stem and progenitor cells and ZEB1
inhibition impaired migration of in vitro propagated human neural stem cells. The
induction of ZEB1 protein in hypoxic glioblastoma neurospheres could be partially
blocked by the HIF1alpha inhibitor digoxin. Targeting ZEB1 blocked
hypoxia-augmented invasion of glioblastoma cells in addition to slowing them in
normoxia. These data support the role for ZEB1 in invasive and high-grade brain
tumors and suggest its key role in promoting invasion in the hypoxic tumor core
as well as in the periphery.

© 2014 International Society of Neuropathology.

PMCID: PMC4470885
PMID: 25521330  [PubMed - in process]


275. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):428. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0428-3. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

The downregulation of miR-200c/141 promotes ZEB1/2 expression and gastric cancer 
progression.

Zhou X(1), Wang Y, Shan B, Han J, Zhu H, Lv Y, Fan X, Sang M, Liu XD, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, 050011, Hebei, People's Republic of China.

Gastric cancer is the fourth most common malignancy in the world. Although
microRNA-200 (miR-200) family members are thought to play roles in tumorigenesis,
their functions in carcinogenesis are tumor specific, and the underlying
mechanism of action still remains elusive. Few studies to date have addressed the
dysregulation and function of miR-200 family members in gastric cancer
progression. Here, we report that the miR-200 family members, miR-200c and
miR-141, were significantly downregulated in gastric cancer specimens and gastric
cancer cell lines. Importantly, on clinical samples, the expression of miR-200c
and miR-141 was inversely correlated with TNM stage, tumor invasion depth (T),
tumor embolus and disease-free survival. Wound-healing assay results showed that 
co-transfected miR-200c/141 could inhibit the migration and invasion capability
of the gastric cell line SGC-7901. We also found that miR-200c and miR-141
directly targeted zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1/2 (ZEB1/2) and upregulated
E-cadherin expression. In specimens from gastric cancer patients, reduced
expression of miR-200c/141 was associated with increased expression of ZEB1
and/or ZEB2. In addition, the downregulation of miR-200c and miR-141 was found to
be due to a highly methylated CpG island located upstream of their genomic
sequence and/or upregulated TGF-ß signaling. Treatment with the chemotherapeutic 
agent decitabine, a known DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, increased miR-200c/141
expression and ameliorated decreased expression of miR-200c/141 induced by TGF-ß 
in SGC-7901 cells. Our study revealed that miR-200c/141 was downregulated by CpG 
island methylation and TGF-ß signaling, which decreased ZEB1/2 expression and
increased E-cadherin expression to inhibit migration and invasion of gastric
cancer cells and provides powerful evidence for the application of decitabine in 
gastric cancer treatment.

PMID: 25502084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):3051-60. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2941-6. Epub 2014
Dec 13.

Epstein-Barr virus latent antigens EBNA3C and EBNA1 modulate epithelial to
mesenchymal transition of cancer cells associated with tumor metastasis.

Gaur N(1), Gandhi J, Robertson ES, Verma SC, Kaul R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Delhi South Campus, Benito Juarez
Road, New Delhi, 110021, India.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition is an important mechanism in cancer
invasiveness and metastasis. We had previously reported that cancer cells
expressing Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent viral antigens EBV nuclear antigen
EBNA3C and/ or EBNA1 showed higher motility and migration potential and had a
propensity for increased metastases when tested in nude mice model. We now show
that both EBNA3C and EBNA1 can modulate cellular pathways critical for epithelial
to mesenchymal transition of cancer cells. Our data confirms that presence of
EBNA3C or EBNA1 result in upregulation of transcriptional repressor Slug and
Snail, upregulation of intermediate filament of mesenchymal origin vimentin,
upregulation of transcription factor TCF8/ZEB1, downregulation as well as
disruption of tight junction zona occludens protein ZO-1, downregulation of cell 
adhesion molecule E-cadherin, and nuclear translocation of ß-catenin. We further 
show that the primary tumors as well as metastasized lesions derived from EBV
antigen-expressing cancer cells in nude mice model display EMT markers expression
pattern suggesting their greater propensity to mesenchymal transition.

PMCID: PMC4793920
PMID: 25501510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(1):162-78. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1293. Epub 2014 Dec
9.

The high mobility group A2 protein epigenetically silences the Cdh1 gene during
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Tan EJ(1), Kahata K(1), Idås O(1), Thuault S(1), Heldin CH(1), Moustakas A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala SE-75124, Sweden. (2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE-75124, Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala SE-75123, Sweden aris.moustakas@imbim.uu.se.

The loss of the tumour suppressor E-cadherin (Cdh1) is a key event during
tumourigenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Transforming growth
factor-ß (TGFß) triggers EMT by inducing the expression of non-histone chromatin 
protein High Mobility Group A2 (HMGA2). We have previously shown that HMGA2,
together with Smads, regulate a network of EMT-transcription factors (EMT-TFs)
like Snail1, Snail2, ZEB1, ZEB2 and Twist1, most of which are well-known
repressors of the Cdh1 gene. In this study, we show that the Cdh1 promoter is
hypermethylated and epigenetically silenced in our constitutive EMT cell model,
whereby HMGA2 is ectopically expressed in mammary epithelial NMuMG cells and
these cells are highly motile and invasive. Furthermore, HMGA2 remodels the
chromatin to favour binding of de novo DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) to the
Cdh1 promoter. E-cadherin expression could be restored after treatment with the
DNA de-methylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Here, we describe a new
epigenetic role for HMGA2, which follows the actions that HMGA2 initiates via the
EMT-TFs, thus achieving sustained silencing of E-cadherin expression and
promoting tumour cell invasion.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4288184
PMID: 25492890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Feb;98(1):41-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 
Dec 3.

Pancreatic cancer cells express CD44 variant 9 and multidrug resistance protein 1
during mitosis.

Kiuchi S(1), Ikeshita S(1), Miyatake Y(2), Kasahara M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. Electronic address:
yukimiya@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal cancers with high metastatic
potential and strong chemoresistance. Its intractable natures are attributed to
high robustness in tumor cells for their survival. We demonstrate here that
pancreatic cancer cells (PCCs) with an epithelial phenotype upregulate cell
surface expression of CD44 variant 9 (CD44v9), an important cancer stem cell
marker, during the mitotic phases of the cell cycle. Of five human CD44(+) PCC
lines examined, three cell lines, PCI-24, PCI-43 and PCI-55, expressed E-cadherin
and CD44 variants, suggesting that they have an epithelial phenotype. By
contrast, PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells expressed vimentin and ZEB1, suggesting
that they have a mesenchymal phenotype. PCCs with an epithelial phenotype
upregulated cell surface expression of CD44v9 in prophase, metaphase, anaphase
and telophase and downregulated CD44v9 expression in late-telophase, cytokinesis 
and interphase. Sorted CD44v9-negative PCI-55 cells resumed CD44v9 expression
when they re-entered the mitotic stage. Interestingly, CD44v9(bright) mitotic
cells expressed multidrug resistance protein 1 (MDR1) intracellularly.
Upregulated expression of CD44v9 and MDR1 might contribute to the intractable
nature of PCCs with high proliferative activity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25481101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2014 Dec;34(6):875-81. doi:
10.1007/s11596-014-1367-0. Epub 2014 Dec 6.

Effects of estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRa) on proliferation and metastasis
of human lung cancer A549 cells.

Huang JW(1), Guan BZ, Yin LH, Liu FN, Hu B, Zheng QY, Li FL, Zhong YX, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University,
Guangzhou, 510630, China, abc95958@163.com.

Estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRa) plays an important role in the development
of hormone-dependent cancers, but its roles in lung cancer remain elusive. The
present study was aimed to investigate the effects of ERRa on the proliferation
and metastasis of lung cancer A549 cells. The mRNA and protein levels of ERRa
were detected in lung cancer A549 and MCF-7 cells and bronchial epithelial
BEAS-2B cells by qRT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. ERRa plasmid
transfection and XCT-790 (an inverse agonist of ERRa) were used to up-regulate or
down-regulate ERRa expression in A549 cells, respectively. The viability of A549 
cells was measured by cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) and the motility of A549 cells 
by wound healing assay and Transwell migration/invasion assay. The epithelial
markers E-cadherin (E-Cad) and zona occludin-1 (ZO-1), the mesenchymal markers
fibronectin (FN) and vimentin (Vim) and the transcription factors (Snail, Zeb1
Twist and Slug) were further detected at mRNA and protein levels by qRT-PCR and
Western blotting, respectively. The results showed that ERRa promoted the growth 
of lung cancer A549 cells in vitro. XCT-790 significantly inhibited the migration
and invasion of A549 cells. Over-expression of ERRa promoted the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of A549 cells, down-regulated the
epithelial makers E-Cad and ZO-1, and up-regulated the mesenchymal makers FN and 
Vim. Silencing of Slug, but not other transcription factors, significantly
abolished the ERRa-induced EMT of A549 cells. It was suggested that ERRa promoted
the migration and invasion of A549 cells by inducing EMT, and Slug was involved
in the process. Targeting ERRa might be an efficient approach for lung cancer
treatment.

PMID: 25480584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Lung Cancer. 2015 Jan;87(1):39-44. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.11.007. Epub 2014 
Nov 15.

Clinicopathological analysis of pleomorphic carcinoma of the lung: diffuse ZEB1
expression predicts poor survival.

Miyahara S(1), Hamasaki M(2), Hamatake D(3), Yamashita S(3), Shiraishi T(3),
Iwasaki A(3), Nabeshima K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fukuoka University School of Medicine and Hospital,
Fukuoka, Japan; Department of General Thoracic, Breast and Pediatric Surgery,
Fukuoka University School of Medicine and Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department
of Pathology, Fukuoka University School of Medicine and Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of General Thoracic, Breast and Pediatric Surgery, Fukuoka
University School of Medicine and Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Department of
Pathology, Fukuoka University School of Medicine and Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
Electronic address: kaznabes@fukuoka-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVES: Pleomorphic carcinoma (PC) of the lung is a rare epithelial tumor.
The clinicopathological characteristics and prognostic factors of PC are
controversial. The information on the ZEB1 gene, which crucially impacts survival
of patients with other malignant tumors, is limited for PC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinicopathological characteristics of 62 patients with PC
were investigated in this study. Associations between immunohistochemical
expression of ZEB1 and clinical factors, including patient prognosis, were
examined. The patient population consisted of 51 (82.2%) men and 11 (17.8%)
women, with a mean age of 65.5 years (range, 31-81 years).
RESULTS: The overall survival rate of the 42 patients, for whom follow-up was
available, was 68.3% at 5 years. Using TNM criteria, 7 (11.3%), 11 (17.7%), 3
(4.8%), 21 (33.8%), 15 (24.2%), 2 (3.2%), and 3 (4.8%) patients were classified
under pathological stage IA, IB, IIA, IIB, IIIA, IIIB and IV carcinomas,
respectively. Fifteen (24.1%) patients had tumors consisting entirely of spindle 
and giant cells (PC component). The other 47 (75.8%) cancers contained additional
carcinoma components (i.e., adenocarcinoma (34/62, 54.8%), squamous cell
carcinoma (7/62, 11.3%), adenosquamous carcinoma (4/62, 6.5%) and large cell
carcinoma (2/62, 3.2%)). Four of 7 (57.1%) stage IA (<20mm) tumors consisted only
of spindle and giant cells. ZEB1 expression was observed only in the PC
component. Diffuse expression of ZEB1, was defined as positive nuclear staining
in =75% of cancer cells, and was found in the PC component in 12 patients.
Multivariate analysis revealed that lymph node metastasis, pleural invasion, and 
diffuse ZEB1 expression in the PC component predicted poorer disease-specific
survival (p=0.007, 0.022, and 0.016, respectively).
CONCLUSION: This is the first report to indicate that ZEB1 may be used as an
immunohistochemical prognosticator of PC, which may be useful for histological
assessment of PC in biopsy and surgical specimens.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25479687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 5;5:5671. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6671.

miR-205 acts as a tumour radiosensitizer by targeting ZEB1 and Ubc13.

Zhang P(1), Wang L(1), Rodriguez-Aguayo C(2), Yuan Y(3), Debeb BG(4), Chen D(1), 
Sun Y(5), You MJ(6), Liu Y(7), Dean DC(7), Woodward WA(4), Liang H(3), Yang X(8),
Lopez-Berestein G(2), Sood AK(9), Hu Y(10), Ang KK(4), Chen J(11), Ma L(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)Department of Experimental 
Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (3)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Oncology, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (6)Department of Hematopathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(7)Molecular Targets Program, James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA. (8)AM
Biotechnologies, Houston, Texas 77034, USA. (9)1] Department of Experimental
Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA [2] Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(10)Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (11)1] Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2]
Cancer Biology and Genes &Development Programs, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Tumour cells associated with therapy resistance (radioresistance and drug
resistance) are likely to give rise to local recurrence and distant metastatic
relapse. Recent studies revealed microRNA (miRNA)-mediated regulation of
metastasis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition; however, whether specific
miRNAs regulate tumour radioresistance and can be exploited as radiosensitizing
agents remains unclear. Here we find that miR-205 promotes radiosensitivity and
is downregulated in radioresistant subpopulations of breast cancer cells, and
that loss of miR-205 is highly associated with poor distant relapse-free survival
in breast cancer patients. Notably, therapeutic delivery of miR-205 mimics via
nanoliposomes can sensitize the tumour to radiation in a xenograft model.
Mechanistically, radiation suppresses miR-205 expression through ataxia
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1).
Moreover, miR-205 inhibits DNA damage repair by targeting ZEB1 and the
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc13. These findings identify miR-205 as a
radiosensitizing miRNA and reveal a new therapeutic strategy for radioresistant
tumours.

PMCID: PMC4377070
PMID: 25476932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. BMC Cancer. 2014 Dec 3;14:904. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-904.

Overexpression of E2F1 in human gastric carcinoma is involved in anti-cancer drug
resistance.

Yan LH, Wei WY, Cao WL, Zhang XS, Xie YB, Xiao Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 530021, China.
xiaoqiang20050@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: Routine chemotherapy often cannot achieve good therapeutic effects
because of multidrug resistance (MDR). MDR is frequently caused by the elevated
expression of the MDR1 gene encoding P-glycoprotein (P-gp). E2F1 is a frequently 
overexpressed protein in human tumor cells that increases the activity of the
MDR1 promoter, resulting in higher P-gp levels. The upregulation of P-gp might
contribute to the survival of tumor cells during chemotherapy. E2F1 confers
anticancer drug resistance; however, we speculate whether E2F1 affects MDR
through other pathways. This study investigated the possible involvement of E2F1 
in anticancer drug resistance of gastric carcinoma in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: A cisplatin-resistant SGC7901/DDP gastric cancer cell line with stable
overexpression of E2F1 was established. Protein expression levels of E2F1, MDR1, 
MRP, TAp73, GAX, ZEB1, and ZEB2 were detected by western blotting. The influence 
of overexpression of E2F1 on anticancer drug resistance was assessed by measuring
IC50 of SGC7901/DDP cells to cisplatin, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil, as well 
as the rate of doxorubicin efflux, apoptosis, and cell cycle progression detected
by flow cytometry. We determined the in vivo effects of E2F1-overexpression on
tumor size in nude mice, and apoptotic cells in tumor tissues were detected by
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling and
hematoxylin and eosin staining.
RESULTS: The SGC7901/DDP gastric cancer cell line stably overexpressing E2F1
exhibited significantly inhibited sensitivity to cisplatin, doxorubicin, and
5-fluorouracil. Flow cytometry confirmed that the percentage of apoptotic cells
decreased after E2F1 upregulation, and that upregulation of E2F1 potentiated S
phase arrest of the cell cycle. Furthermore, upregulation of E2F1 significantly
decreased intracellular accumulation of doxorubicin. Western blot revealed that
E2F1 upregulation suppressed expression of GAX, and increased the expression of
MDR1, MRP, ZEB1, TAp73, and ZEB2.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of E2F1 promotes the development of MDR in gastric
carcinoma, suggesting that E2F1 may represent an efficacious target for gastric
cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4258940
PMID: 25466554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):979-94.

Atypical ubiquitin E3 ligase complex Skp1-Pam-Fbxo45 controls the core
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-inducing transcription factors.

Xu M(1,)(2), Zhu C(2), Zhao X(2), Chen C(2), Zhang H(2), Yuan H(1), Deng R(2),
Dou J(2), Wang Y(2), Huang J(2), Chen Q(2), Jiang B(1), Yu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology & Department of Oncology, Shanghai 9th People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology & Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Cell Biology & Shanghai Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and
Inflammation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a critical role in the development 
of tumor metastases by enhancing migration/invasion. One of the hallmarks of EMT 
is loss of E-cadherin and gain of N-cadherin expression, which are regulated by
the core EMT-inducing transcription factors (EMT-TFs), such as Zeb1/2, Snai1/2
and Twist1. Here, we find that EMT-TFs can be dynamically degraded by an atypical
ubiquitin E3 ligase complex Skp1-Pam-Fbxo45 (SPFFbxo45) through the ubiquitin
proteasome system (UPS). The key step is recognition of EMT-TFs by Fbxo45 through
its SPRY domain for Zeb2, or F-box domain for the other three EMT-TFs Snai1,
Snai2 and Twist1, respectively. The K48-linkaged ubiquitination capability on
Zeb2 relies on its functional SBD domain. In addition, miR-27a* can directly
down-regulate the expression of Fbxo45, preventing degradation of EMT-TFs and
thus ensuring EMT phenotype. We suggest that Fbxo45 is a key node of the
miR-27a*/Fbxo45/EMT-TFs signaling axis.

PMCID: PMC4359269
PMID: 25460509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jan;46(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.10.004. Epub 2014 Oct
16.

The clinical role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stem cell markers in
advanced-stage ovarian serous carcinoma effusions.

Davidson B(1), Holth A(2), Hellesylt E(2), Tan TZ(3), Huang RY(4), Tropé C(5),
Nesland JM(6), Thiery JP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Norwegian Radium Hospital, 
N-0424 Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oslo, N-0424 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: bend@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Norwegian Radium Hospital, 
N-0424 Oslo, Norway. (3)Cancer Science Institute (CSI), Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, MD6 Centre for Translational
Medicine, 117599 Singapore. (4)Cancer Science Institute (CSI), Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, MD6 Centre for
Translational Medicine, 117599 Singapore; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, National University Health System, 1E Kent Ridge Road, 119228
Singapore. (5)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Oslo, N-0424 Oslo, Norway; Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Oslo University
Hospital, Norwegian Radium Hospital, N-0424 Oslo, Norway. (6)Department of
Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Norwegian Radium Hospital, N-0424 Oslo,
Norway; Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, 
N-0424 Oslo, Norway. (7)Cancer Science Institute (CSI), Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, MD6 Centre for Translational
Medicine, 117599 Singapore; Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, MD6 Centre for Translational
Medicine, 117599 Singapore; Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB)
A*STAR, Proteos 138673, Singapore.

We recently identified gene signatures that allow classification of ovarian
carcinoma into 5 distinct clinically relevant groups. In the present study, we
investigated the clinical role of 10 protein products of the discriminating
genes, with focus on epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stem cell markers.
Expression of E-cadherin, N-cadherin, P-cadherin, Zeb1, HMGA2, Rab25, CD24, NCAM 
(CD56), Sox11, and vimentin was assessed in 100 advanced-stage (International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stages III-IV) serous ovarian carcinoma
effusions using immunohistochemistry. Results were analyzed for association with 
clinicopathological parameters, including chemotherapy response, and survival.
All 10 proteins were frequently expressed in carcinoma cells. HMGA2 expression
was related to older age (P = .015). HMGA2 and NCAM expression was related to
stage III disease (P = .011 and P = .023, respectively), and NCAM was
overexpressed in peritoneal compared with pleural effusions (P = .001). Vimentin 
and Zeb1 expression was significantly related to poor chemotherapy response at
diagnosis (P = .005 and P = .017, respectively). The associations between NCAM
and peritoneal localization and of vimentin and poor chemoresponse were retained 
after Bonferroni correction. NCAM expression was associated with a trend for
shorter overall survival in univariate survival analysis (P = .187), but emerged 
as an independent prognosticator in Cox multivariate analysis (P = .042). This
study identifies vimentin and Zeb1 as markers of poor chemoresponse in metastatic
serous ovarian carcinoma effusions and suggests NCAM as potential prognostic
marker in metastatic disease. The generally limited prognostic role of the
studied markers emphasizes the difficulty in applying data obtained in studies of
primary ovarian carcinomas to analyses of ovarian carcinoma effusions, reflecting
the unique biology of the latter.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25455994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(1):125-36. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.987078.

The glycosyltransferase LARGE2 is repressed by Snail and ZEB1 in prostate cancer.

Huang Q(1), Miller MR, Schappet J, Henry MD.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics ; University of Iowa
Carver College of Medicine ; Iowa City , IA USA.

Reductions in both expression of the dystroglycan core protein and functional
glycosylation of the a-dystroglycan (aDG) subunit have been reported in a number 
of cancers and may contribute to disease progression. In the case of prostate
cancer, one mechanism that contributes to aDG hypoglycosylation is
transcriptional down-regulation of LARGE2 (GYLTY1B), a glycosyltransferase that
produces the functional (laminin-binding) glycan on aDG, but the mechanism(s)
underlying reduction of LARGE2 mRNA remain unclear. Here, we show that aDG
hypoglycosylation is associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-like status. We examined immunoreactivity for both
functionally-glycosylated aDG and E-cadherin by flow cytometry and the relative
expression of ZEB1 mRNA and the aDG glycosyltransferase LARGE2 mRNA in prostate
and other cancer cell lines by quantitative RT-PCR. To study the role of ZEB1 and
other transcription factors in the regulation of LARGE2, we employed
overexpression and knockdown approaches. Snail- or ZEB1-driven EMT caused aDG
hypoglycosylation by repressing expression of the LARGE2 mRNA, with both
ZEB1-dependent and -independent mechanisms contributing to Snail-mediated LARGE2 
repression. To examine the direct regulation of LARGE2 by Snail and ZEB1 we
employed luciferase reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Snail and 
ZEB1 were found to bind directly to the LARGE2 promoter, specifically to E/Z-box 
clusters. Furthermore, analysis of gene expression profiles of clinical samples
in The Cancer Genome Atlas reveals negative correlation of LARGE2 and ZEB1
expression in various cancers. Collectively, our results suggest that LARGE2 is
negatively regulated by Snail and/or ZEB1, revealing a mechanistic basis for aDG 
hypoglycosylation during prostate cancer progression and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4623020
PMID: 25455932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Am J Pathol. 2015 Jan;185(1):85-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.019. Epub 2014 
Nov 15.

The Patched 1 tumor-suppressor gene protects the mouse lens from spontaneous and 
radiation-induced cataract.

De Stefano I(1), Tanno B(2), Giardullo P(1), Leonardi S(2), Pasquali E(2),
Antonelli F(2), Tanori M(2), Casciati A(2), Pazzaglia S(2), Saran A(3), Mancuso
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Physics, Guglielmo Marconi University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Radiation Biology and Biomedicine, Agenzia Nazionale per le
Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome,
Italy. (3)Laboratory of Radiation Biology and Biomedicine, Agenzia Nazionale per 
le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: anna.saran@enea.it. (4)Laboratory of Radiation Biology
and Biomedicine, Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo
Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
mariateresa.mancuso@enea.it.

Age-related cataract is the most common cause of visual impairment. Moreover,
traumatic cataracts form after injury to the eye, including radiation damage. We 
report herein that sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a key role in cataract
development and in normal lens response to radiation injury. Mice heterozygous
for Patched 1 (Ptch1), the Shh receptor and negative regulator of the pathway,
develop spontaneous cataract and are highly susceptible to cataract induction by 
exposure to ionizing radiation in early postnatal age, when lens epithelial cells
undergo rapid expansion in the lens epithelium. Neonatally irradiated and control
Ptch1(+/-) mice were compared for markers of progenitors, Shh pathway activation,
and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Molecular analyses showed
increased expression of the EMT-related transforming growth factor ß/Smad
signaling pathway in the neonatally irradiated lens, and up-regulation of
mesenchymal markers Zeb1 and Vim. We further show a link between proliferation
and the stemness property of lens epithelial cells, controlled by Shh. Our
results suggest that Shh and transforming growth factor ß signaling cooperate to 
promote Ptch1-associated cataract development by activating EMT, and that the
Nanog marker of pluripotent cells may act as the primary transcription factor on 
which both signaling pathways converge after damage. These findings highlight a
novel function of Shh signaling unrelated to cancer and provide a new animal
model to investigate the molecular pathogenesis of cataract formation.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25452120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 15;211:20-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.11.009. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

Novel genes and hormonal regulation for gonadal development during embryogenesis 
in chickens.

Lim W(1), Song G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biotechnology,
College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: ghsong@korea.ac.kr.

Asymmetrical gonadal morphogenesis is well known in female chickens in contrast
to males where both gonads develop symmetrically. However, only a few genes have 
been reported to determine differential morphology between female and male gonads
in chicken and their mechanisms of action are unclear. Therefore, we focused on
three genes (TOM1L1, TTR, and ZEB1) that are related to cellular proliferation
and embryonic development based on previous study indicating up- or
down-regulated transcripts in the asymmetric female gonads between embryonic day 
6 (E6) and E9 by microarray analyses. To define the validity of the gene
expression pattern discovered, q-PCR and in situ hybridization analyses were
performed. In the left female gonad between E6 and E9 the expression of TOM1L1,
TTR and ZEB1 increased at E9. On the other hand, TOM1L1 and TTR increased
significantly in both male gonads between E6 and E9. In addition, recombinant FSH
and LH stimulated proliferation of gonadal cells and influenced expression of
selected genes in chickens. This suggests that hormonal regulation is involved in
growth and development in the embryonic gonad of chickens. Collectively, the
results show differential gene expression between the left and right gonads in
chicken embryos and that of is regulated by gonadotropin. These results provide
novel insights into candidate genes regulating gonad development and
differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25452029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Res Vet Sci. 2014 Dec;97(3):554-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2014.09.016. Epub 2014 Oct
7.

ZEB2 and ZEB1 expression in a spontaneous canine model of invasive micropapillary
carcinoma of the mammary gland.

Gamba CO(1), Campos LC(1), Negreiros-Lima GL(2), Maciel-Lima K(2), Sousa LP(2),
Estrela-Lima A(3), Ferreira E(1), Cassali GD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia Geral, Instituto de Ciência Biológicas, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais
31270-901, Brazil. (2)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas,
Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos
6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais 31270-901, Brazil. (3)Departamento de
Patologia e Clínicas, Escola de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade Federal da
Bahia, Av. Adhemar de Barros, 500, Ondina, Salvador, Bahia 40170-110, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Patologia Geral, Instituto de Ciência Biológicas, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais
31270-901, Brazil. Electronic address: cassalig@icb.ufmg.br.

ZEB1 and ZEB2 have been recently related to cancer prognosis. We investigated
their expression and its association with clinicopathological parameters and
overall survival in invasive micropapillary carcinoma (IMPC), which is a
metastasising neoplasm of the canine mammary gland. Immunohistochemical
evaluation showed nuclear and cytoplasmic staining for ZEB2 and nuclear staining 
for ZEB1. 'In situ' areas presented higher positivity for cytoplasmic ZEB2 than
invasive areas of IMPC did (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). ZEB1 positivity was associated with a low 
histological grade (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). A shorter overall survival rate was observed in
IMPCs that were positive for cytoplasmic ZEB2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04). Antibodies specificity 
in canine species was confirmed by western blot. Our results indicated that
cytoplasmic ZEB2 appears to be an important factor in the early stages of
malignancy and predicts a poor overall survival rate for IMPC in this canine
mammary cancer model. ZEB1 downregulation appears to be associated with the
dedifferentiation process of IMPC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Dec;97(3):542-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.11.002. Epub 2014
Nov 6.

Ski diminishes TGF-ß1-induced myofibroblast phenotype via up-regulating Meox2
expression.

Chen Z(1), Li W(2), Ning Y(2), Liu T(2), Shao J(2), Wang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, Liao Cheng Hospital, Liao Cheng
252000, China. Electronic address: zhaowei_chen@163.com. (2)Department of Burns
and Plastic Surgery, Liao Cheng Hospital, Liao Cheng 252000, China. (3)Department
of Burns and Skin Surgery, Xi Jing Hospital, Xian 710032, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present work was to investigate the mechanism of
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1 and Sloan-Kettering Institute (Ski) in the
pathogenesis of hypertrophic scars (HS).
BACKGROUND: Wound healing is an inherent process, but the aberrant wound healing 
of skin injury may lead to HS. There has been growing evidence suggesting a role 
for TGF-ß1 and Ski in the pathogenesis of fibrosis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The MTT assay was used to detect the cell proliferation
induced by TGF-ß1. The Ski gene was transduced into cells with an adenovirus, and
then the function of Ski in cell proliferation and differentiation was observed. 
Ski mRNA levels were measured by RT-PCR. Western blotting was used to detect the 
protein expression of a-SMA, E-cadherin, Meox1, Meox2, Zeb1 and Zeb2.
RESULTS: TGF-ß1 can promote human skin fibroblast (HSF) cell proliferation in a
time-dependent manner, but the promoting effect could be suppressed by Ski.
TGF-ß1 also induces the formation of the myofibroblast phenotype and the effect
of TGF-ß1 could be diminished by Ski. Also, Ski modulates the cardiac
myofibroblast phenotype and function through suppression of Zeb2 by up-regulating
the expression of Meox2.
CONCLUSIONS: Ski diminishes the myofibroblast phenotype induced by TGF-ß1 through
the suppression of Zeb2 by up-regulating the expression of Meox2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Ann Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;79(1):1-9. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12090. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Identification of six novel mutations in ZEB1 and description of the associated
phenotypes in patients with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 3.

Evans CJ(1), Liskova P, Dudakova L, Hrabcikova P, Horinek A, Jirsova K, Filipec
M, Hardcastle AJ, Davidson AE, Tuft SJ.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 3 (PPCD3) is a rare autosomal dominant
disorder caused by mutations in ZEB1. To date all identified disease-causing
variants were unique to the studied families, except for c.1576dup. We have
detected six novel ZEB1 mutations; c.1749_1750del; p.(Pro584*) and
c.1717_1718del; p.(Val573Phefs*12) in two Czech families, c.1176dup;
p.(Ala393Serfs*19), c.1100C>A; p.(Ser367*), c.627del; p.(Phe209Leufs*11) in three
British families and a splice site mutation, c.685-2A>G, in a patient of Sri
Lankan origin. An additional British proband had the c.1576dup; p.(Val526Glyfs*3)
mutation previously reported in other populations. Clinical findings were
variable and included bilateral congenital corneal opacity in one proband,
development of opacity before the age of 2 years in another individual and
bilateral iris flocculi in yet another subject. The majority of eyes examined by 
corneal topography (10 out of 16) had an abnormally steep cornea (flat
keratometry 46.5-52.7 diopters, steep keratometry 48.1-54.0 diopters). One
proband underwent surgery for cryptorchidism. Our study further demonstrates that
PPCD3 can present as corneal edema in early childhood, and that an abnormally
steep keratometry is a common feature of this condition. As cryptorchidism has
been previously observed in two other PPCD3 cases, its association with the
disease warrants further investigation.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 25441224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 1;5:5660. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6660.

Different thresholds of ZEB1 are required for Ras-mediated tumour initiation and 
metastasis.

Liu Y(1), Lu X(2), Huang L(3), Wang W(2), Jiang G(2), Dean KC(2), Clem B(4),
Telang S(4), Jenson AB(4), Cuatrecasas M(5), Chesney J(4), Darling DS(6), Postigo
A(7), Dean DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular Targets Program, James Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA [2] Department
of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences
Center, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA [3] Birth Defects Center, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA. (2)Department
of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences
Center, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA. (3)1] Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville,
Kentucky 40202, USA [2] College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zejiang
University, Zejiang 310058, China. (4)Molecular Targets Program, James Brown
Cancer Center, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville,
Kentucky 40202, USA. (5)1] Department of Pathology, Centro de Diagnóstico
Biomédico (CDB) Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona 08036, Spain 
[2] Tumor Bank-Biobank, IDIBAPS, Barcelona 08036, Spain. (6)Department of
Periodontics, Endodontics, and Dental Hygiene, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA. (7)1] Molecular Targets Program, James Brown
Cancer Center, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville,
Kentucky 40202, USA [2] Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain [3] ICREA, Barcelona 08010, Spain.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:6699.

Ras pathway mutation is frequent in carcinomas where it induces expression of the
transcriptional repressor ZEB1. Although ZEB1 is classically linked to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumour metastasis, it has an emerging
second role in generation of cancer-initiating cells. Here we show that Ras
induction of ZEB1 is required for tumour initiation in a lung cancer model, and
we link this function to repression Pten, whose loss is critical for emergence of
cancer-initiating cells. These two roles for ZEB1 in tumour progression can be
distinguished by their requirement for different levels of ZEB1. A lower
threshold of ZEB1 is sufficient for cancer initiation, whereas further induction 
is necessary for tumour metastasis.

PMID: 25434817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015 Jun;291(6):1361-9. doi: 10.1007/s00404-014-3555-3. Epub
2014 Nov 26.

Celecoxib induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition in epithelial ovarian cancer 
cells via regulating ZEB1 expression.

Liu R(1), Zheng J, Li C, Pang Y, Zheng Q, Xu X, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qilu Hospital of Shangdong
University, No. 107 Wen Hua Xi Road, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China.

PURPOSE: The purpose of our study was to investigate the therapeutic potential of
Celecoxib for epithelial ovarian cancer, especially on cellular morphological
changes, proliferation invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
METHOD: The MTT and transwell assays were performed to evaluate the effect of
Celecoxib on proliferation and invasion ability of ovarian cancer cell lines,
respectively. Western blot was carried out to detect the expression of epithelial
phenotypes, E-cadherin and Keratin, and mesenchymal phenotypes, N-cadherin and
Vimentin, as well as p-AKT, p-ERK and ZEB1. ZEB1 small-interfering RNA (siRNA)
was used to downregulate the expression of ZEB1 to further inquiring into the
downstream of Celecoxib-induced EMT.
RESULTS: Cellular morphological assessment revealed that both A2780 and SKOV3
cells gradually appeared in the morphology of mesenchymal cells after Celecoxib
treatment. The MTT assay demonstrated that celecoxib had no effect on cell
proliferation. Transwell assay showed that Celecoxib significantly increased the 
cell invasion ability. Western blot data proved that the expression of E-cadherin
and keratin was elevated, whereas the expression of N-cadherin and Vimentin was
decreased in a dose-dependent manner compared with the untreated cells, the
expression of p-AKT, p-ERK and ZEB1 was also obviously elevated. However, ZEB1
siRNA reversed Celecoxib-induced E-cadherin expression and N-cadherin expression,
as well as cellular invasiveness.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that Celecoxib might induce EMT and increase
cellular invasiveness in ovarian cancer cells in vitro, which also implied that
it needed a comprehensive evaluation in preclinical researches before introducing
Celecoxib into the clinical regimen.

PMID: 25424898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Int J Oncol. 2015 Feb;46(2):685-90. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2772. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Pien Tze Huang inhibits metastasis of human colorectal carcinoma cells via
modulation of TGF-ß1/ZEB/miR-200 signaling network.

Shen A(1), Lin W(1), Chen Y(2), Liu L(1), Chen H(1), Zhuang Q(1), Lin J(1),
Sferra TJ(2), Peng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Minhou Shangjie, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China. (2)Rainbow Babies
and Children's Hospital, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Tumor metastasis, a complex process involving the spread of malignant tumor cells
from a primary tumor site to a distant organ, is a major cause of failure of
cancer chemotherapy. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical step
for the initiation of cancer metastasis. The processes of EMT and metastasis are 
highly regulated by a double-negative feedback loop consisting of TGF-ß1/ZEB
pathway and miR-200 family, which therefore has become a promising target for
cancer chemotherapy. Pien Tze Huang (PZH), a well-known traditional Chinese
formula first prescribed in the Ming Dynasty, has been demonstrated to be
clinically effective in the treatment of various types of human malignancy
including colorectal cancer (CRC). Our published data proposed that PZH was able 
to induce apoptosis, inhibit cell proliferation and tumor angiogenesis, leading
to the suppression of CRC growth in vitro and in vivo. To further elucidate the
mode of action of PZH, in the present study we evaluated its effects on the
metastatic capacities of human colorectal carcinoma HCT-8 cells and investigated 
the underlying molecular mechanisms. We found that PZH significantly inhibited
the migration and invasion of HCT-8 cells in a dose-dependent manner. In
addition, PZH treatment inhibited the expression of key mediators of TGF-ß1
signaling, such as TGF-ß1, Smad2/3 and Smad4. Moreover, PZH treatment suppressed 
the expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2, two critical target genes of TGF-ß1 pathway,
leading to a decrease in the expression of mesenchymal marker N-cadherin and an
increased expression of epithelial marker E-cadherin. Furthermore, PZH treatment 
upregulated the expression of miR-200a, miR-200b and miR-200c. Collectively, our 
findings in this study suggest that PZH can inhibit metastasis of colorectal
cancer cells via modulating TGF-ß1/ZEB/miR-200 signaling network, which might be 
one of the mechanisms whereby PZH exerts its anticancer function.

PMID: 25422078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Liver Int. 2015 Apr;35(4):1324-33. doi: 10.1111/liv.12737. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Changes in microRNA expression during disease progression in patients with
chronic viral hepatitis.

Sinigaglia A(1), Lavezzo E, Trevisan M, Sanavia T, Di Camillo B, Peta E, Scarpa
M, Castagliuolo I, Guido M, Sarcognato S, Cappellesso R, Fassina A, Cardin R,
Farinati F, Palù G, Barzon L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy; IOV
Istituto Oncologico Veneto, Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been involved in hepatocarcinogenesis,
but little is known on their role in the progression of chronic viral hepatitis. 
Aim of this study was to identify miRNA signatures associated with stages of
disease progression in patients with chronic viral hepatitis.
METHODS: MiRNA expression profile was investigated in liver biopsies from
patients with chronic viral hepatitis and correlated with clinical, virological
and histopathological features. Relevant miRNAs were further investigated.
RESULTS: Most of the significant changes in miRNA expression were associated with
liver fibrosis stages and included the significant up-regulation of a group of
miRNAs that were demonstrated to target the master regulators of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition ZEB1 and ZEB2 and involved in the preservation 
of epithelial cell differentiation, but also in cell proliferation and
fibrogenesis. In agreement with miRNA data, immunostaining of liver biopsies
showed that expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin was maintained in
severe fibrosis/cirrhosis while expression of ZEBs and other markers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition were low or absent. Severe liver fibrosis was
also significantly associated with the down-regulation of miRNAs with
antiproliferative and tumour suppressor activity. Similar changes in miRNA and
target gene expression were demonstrated along with disease progression in a
mouse model of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced liver fibrosis, suggesting
that they might represent a general response to liver injury.
CONCLUSION: Chronic viral hepatitis progression is associated with the activation
of miRNA pathways that promote cell proliferation and fibrogenesis, but preserve 
the differentiated hepatocyte phenotype.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25417901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Histol Histopathol. 2015 May;30(5):569-79. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

SIP1 predicts progression and poor prognosis in pharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Jouppila-Mättö A(1), Mannermaa A(2), Sironen R(2), Kosma VM(2), Soini Y(2),
Pukkila M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Biocenter
Kuopio and Cancer Center of Eastern Finland, University of Eastern Finland, and
Department of Otorhinolaryngology- Head and Neck Surgery, Kuopio University
Hospital, and Institute of Clinical Medicine, Otorhinolaryngology- Head and Neck 
Surgery, University of Easter, Kuopio, Finland. anna.jouppila-matto@uef.fi.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Biocenter
Kuopio and Cancer Center of Eastern Finland, University of Eastern Finland, and
Department of Clinical Pathology, Imaging center, Kuopio University Hospital,
Kuopio, Finland. (3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology- Head and Neck Surgery,
Kuopio University Hospital, and Institute of Clinical Medicine,
Otorhinolaryngology- Head and Neck Surgery, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVES: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial process in
tumorigenesis that enables tumor cells to invade and metastasize. The
transcription factors SIP1, SLUG, ZEB1, SNAI1, and TWIST are fundamental in
regulating EMT. We investigated the relationships between several
clinicopathological variables, prognosis, and SIP1, SLUG, or ZEB1 in a
retrospective pharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) cohort.
STUDY DESIGN: Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the expression of SIP1,
SLUG, and ZEB1 in 108 tumor samples from a retrospective cohort of patients with 
PSCC.
RESULTS: Tumors with positive epithelial SIP1 immunostaining were more advanced
(SIII-IV, p=0.02) and had more lymph node metastases (p=0.04) than SIP1-negative 
tumors. Tumors with positive stromal staining of SIP1 relapsed more often than
SIP1-negative tumors (p=0.007). Negative SIP1 immunoreactivity correlated
significantly with better disease-specific survival (DSS) and better overall
survival (OS) (p=0.012 and p=0.003 for epithelial reactivity, p=0.018 and p=0.003
for stromal reactivity, respectively). Lack of epithelial SIP1 expression
remained an independent and favorable prognostic factor in a Cox proportional
hazards model (p=0.046), together with high Karnofsky performance status score
and low T class (p<0.001 for both). Co-expression of SNAI1, TWIST, and SIP1 in
tumor epithelium predicted even shorter DSS than SIP1 expression alone (p<0.001) 
in the present study cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: SIP1 is related to cancer progression and appears to be an
independent prognostic factor in PSCC.

PMID: 25412653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):2271-6. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2834-8. Epub 2014 Nov
20.

Lung metastasis of pancreatic carcinoma is regulated by TGFß signaling.

Song L(1), Wang P, Tian Y, Chang D, Li K, Fan Y, Shen J, Du H, Mi R, Bian X, Tang
X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of
Basic Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, 5 Dongdansantiao, 100005, Beijing, China, liqiang_song@163.com.

The molecular regulation of the lung metastasis of pancreatic carcinoma (PCC) is 
not completely understood. Here, we show that the levels of phosphorylated SMAD3,
ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail1, and Snail2 were significantly higher in PCC with lung
metastasis than in PCC without lung metastasis. Overexpression of TGFß1 enhanced 
the invasiveness of PCC cells, while inhibition of TGFß1 decreased the
invasiveness of PCC cells, which appeared to be conducted by activated TGFß
receptor signaling-induced upregulation of ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail1, and Snail2,
suggesting a process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Taken together, 
our study provides evidence that TGFß receptor signaling-induced EMT may be
responsible for the increased PCC invasiveness to enhance its lung metastasis.

PMID: 25409617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Case Rep Ophthalmol. 2014 Sep 17;5(3):281-8. doi: 10.1159/000367937. eCollection 
2014.

First identification of a triple corneal dystrophy association: keratoconus,
epithelial basement membrane corneal dystrophy and fuchs' endothelial corneal
dystrophy.

Mazzotta C(1), Traversi C(1), Raiskup F(2), Rizzo CL(3), Renieri A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (2)Department 
of Ophthalmology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (3)Medical
Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

PURPOSE: To report the observation of a triple corneal dystrophy association
consisting of keratoconus (KC), epithelial basement membrane corneal dystrophy
(EBMCD) and Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD).
METHODS: A 55-year-old male patient was referred to our cornea service for
blurred vision and recurrent foreign body sensation. He reported bilateral
recurrent corneal erosions with diurnal visual fluctuations. He underwent corneal
biomicroscopy, Scheimpflug tomography, in vivo HRT confocal laser scanning
microscopy and genetic testing for TGFBI and ZEB1 mutations using direct DNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: Biomicroscopic examination revealed the presence of subepithelial
central and paracentral corneal opacities. The endothelium showed a bilateral
flecked appearance, and the posterior corneal curvature suggested a possible
concomitant ectatic disorder. Corneal tomography confirmed the presence of a
stage II KC in both eyes. In vivo confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed a
concomitant bilateral EBMCD with hyperreflective deposits in basal epithelial
cells, subbasal Bowman's layer microfolds and ridges with truncated subbasal
nerves as pseudodendritic elements. Stromal analysis revealed honeycomb edematous
areas, and the endothelium showed a strawberry surface configuration typical of
FECD. The genetic analysis resulted negative for TGFBI mutations and positive for
a heterozygous mutation in exon 7 of the gene ZEB1.
CONCLUSION: This is the first case reported in the literature in which KC, EBMCD 
and FECD are present in the same patient and associated with ZEB1 gene mutation. 
The triple association was previously established by means of morphological
analysis of the cornea using corneal Scheimpflug tomography and in vivo HRT II
confocal laser scanning microscopy.

PMCID: PMC4209271
PMID: 25408666  [PubMed]


298. Int J Oncol. 2015 Feb;46(2):531-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2759. Epub 2014 Nov 17.

miR-429 inhibits migration and invasion of breast cancer cells in vitro.

Ye ZB(1), Ma G(2), Zhao YH(2), Xiao Y(3), Zhan Y(2), Jing C(2), Gao K(4), Liu
ZH(2), Yu SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Cancer Hospital (Institute), Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, P.R. China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Hospital (Institute),
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100021, P.R. China. (3)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, P.R. China. (4)Institute of
Laboratory Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing 100021, P.R. China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in
regulating cancer invasion and metastasis, and an increasing number of research
demonstrates that miRNAs can promote or inhibit cell motility depending on
genetic background of different cancers and the microenvironment. In the present 
study, we established an in vivo bone metastasis model of breast cancer by
injecting MDA-MB-231 cells into the left ventricle of nude mice, and then
screened the differentially expressed miRNAs between parental and bone-metastatic
MDA-MB-231 cells using miRNA array. The results revealed that decreased
expression of miR-429 was probably involved in negatively regulating bone
metastasis of breast cancer cells. On the other hand, overexpression of miR-429
in MDA-MB-231 cells remarkably suppressed invasion in vitro. We identified ZEB1
and CRKL as potential targets of miR-429 by analyzing combined results from in
silico search and global expression array of the same RNA samples. Immunoblot
assay confirmed that miR-429 reduced their expression at protein level. Taken
together, our results offer an opportunity for further understanding of the
recondite mechanisms underlying the bone metastasis of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4277243
PMID: 25405387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 14;16(6):473. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0473-z.

MiR-183/-96/-182 cluster is up-regulated in most breast cancers and increases
cell proliferation and migration.

Li P, Sheng C, Huang L, Zhang H, Huang L, Cheng Z, Zhu Q.

INTRODUCTION: The miR-183/-96/-182 cluster is a conserved polycistronic microRNA 
(miRNA) cluster which is highly expressed in most breast cancers. Although there 
are some sporadic reports which demonstrate the importance of each miRNA in this 
cluster in breast cancer, the biological roles of this cluster as a whole and its
regulation mechanisms in breast cancer are still unclear. We compared the
expression of this cluster in different cancer types, analyzed the regulation
mechanism of this cluster, identified new target genes, and examined the impact
of this cluster on breast cancer cells.
METHODS: The miRNA level was detected by LNA-based northern blot and Real-time
PCR, and was also analyzed from TCGA dataset. Bioinformatics research and
luciferase assay were applied to find the promoter regions and transcription
factors. To investigate the biological effects of the miR-183/-96 /-182 cluster
in breast cancer, we generated miR-96, miR-182 and miR-183 overexpression stable 
cell lines to check the overdose effects; we also used miR-Down antagomir for
each miRNA as well as miR-183/-96 /-182 cluster sponge lentivirus to check the
knockdown effects. Growth, migration, cell cycle profile and survival of these
cells was then monitored by colony formation assay, MTT assay, cell wound healing
assay, flow cytometry and microscopy. The target gene was validated by Real-time 
PCR, luciferase assay, Western blot and Phalloidin/DAPI counterstaining.
RESULTS: The miR-183/-96/-182 cluster was highly expressed in most breast
cancers, and its transcription is disordered in breast cancer. The
miR-183/-96/-182 cluster was transcribed in the same pri-miRNA and its
transcription was regulated by ZEB1 and HSF2. It increased breast cell growth by 
promoting more rapid completion of mitosis, promoted cell migration and was
essential for cell survival. MiR-183 targeted the RAB21 mRNA directly in breast
cancer.
CONCLUSION: The miR-183/-96/-182 cluster is up-regulated in most breast cancer.
It functions as an oncogene in breast cancer as it increases cell proliferation
and migration.

PMCID: PMC4303194
PMID: 25394902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 26;289(52):36275-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.592360. Epub
2014 Nov 12.

MicroRNA-200 is induced by thioredoxin-interacting protein and regulates Zeb1
protein signaling and beta cell apoptosis.

Filios SR(1), Xu G(1), Chen J(1), Hong K(1), Jing G(1), Shalev A(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Comprehensive Diabetes Center and Division of Endocrinology,
Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-2182. (2)From the Comprehensive Diabetes
Center and Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-2182
shalev@uab.edu.

Small noncoding microRNAs have emerged as important regulators of cellular
processes, but their role in pancreatic beta cells has only started to be
elucidated. Loss of pancreatic beta cells is a key factor in the pathogenesis of 
diabetes, and we have demonstrated that beta cell expression of
thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) is increased in diabetes and causes beta 
cell apoptosis, whereas TXNIP deficiency is protective against diabetes.
Recently, we found that TXNIP also impairs beta cell function by inducing
microRNA (miR)-204. Interestingly, using INS-1 beta cells and primary islets, we 
have now discovered that expression of another microRNA, miR-200, is induced by
TXNIP and by diabetes. Furthermore, we found that miR-200 targeted and decreased 
Zeb1 (zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1) and promoted beta cell apoptosis as
measured by cleaved caspase-3 levels, Bax/Bcl2 ratio, and TUNEL. In addition,
Zeb1 knockdown mimicked the miR-200 effects on beta cell apoptosis, suggesting
that Zeb1 plays an important role in mediating miR-200 effects. Moreover, miR-200
increased beta cell expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin, consistent
with inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a process thought to be
involved in beta cell expansion. Thus, we have identified a novel
TXNIP/miR-200/Zeb1/E-cadherin signaling pathway that, for the first time, links
miR-200 to beta cell apoptosis and diabetes and also beta cell TXNIP to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. In addition, our results shed new light on the
regulation and function of miR-200 in beta cells and show that TXNIP-induced
microRNAs control various processes of beta cell biology.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4276888
PMID: 25391656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 11;9(11):e112630. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112630.
eCollection 2014.

High-throughput sequencing approach uncovers the miRNome of peritoneal
endometriotic lesions and adjacent healthy tissues.

Saare M(1), Rekker K(2), Laisk-Podar T(2), Sõritsa D(3), Roost AM(4), Simm J(5), 
Velthut-Meikas A(6), Samuel K(4), Metsalu T(7), Karro H(8), Sõritsa A(9),
Salumets A(1), Peters M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia;
Institute of Bio- and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia. (2)Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tartu,
Estonia; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia. (3)Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tartu,
Estonia; Tartu University Hospital's Women's Clinic, Tartu, Estonia; Elite
Clinic, Sangla 63, Tartu, Estonia. (4)Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine 
and Biology, Tartu, Estonia. (5)Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT),
STADIUS Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal Processing and Data Analytics, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; iMinds Medical IT, Leuven, Belgium; Centre for Biology
of Integrated Systems, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia.
(6)Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia; Centre
for Biology of Integrated Systems, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn,
Estonia. (7)Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; 
Tartu University Hospital's Women's Clinic, Tartu, Estonia. (9)Elite Clinic,
Sangla 63, Tartu, Estonia.

Accumulating data have shown the involvement of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
endometriosis pathogenesis. In this study, we used a novel approach to determine 
the endometriotic lesion-specific miRNAs by high-throughput small RNA sequencing 
of paired samples of peritoneal endometriotic lesions and matched healthy
surrounding tissues together with eutopic endometria of the same patients. We
found five miRNAs specific to epithelial cells--miR-34c, miR-449a, miR-200a,
miR-200b and miR-141 showing significantly higher expression in peritoneal
endometriotic lesions compared to healthy peritoneal tissues. We also determined 
the expression levels of miR-200 family target genes E-cadherin, ZEB1 and ZEB2
and found that the expression level of E-cadherin was significantly higher in
endometriotic lesions compared to healthy tissues. Further evaluation verified
that studied miRNAs could be used as diagnostic markers for confirming the
presence of endometrial cells in endometriotic lesion biopsy samples.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that the miRNA profile of peritoneal endometriotic
lesion biopsies is largely masked by the surrounding peritoneal tissue,
challenging the discovery of an accurate lesion-specific miRNA profile. Taken
together, our findings indicate that only particular miRNAs with a significantly 
higher expression in endometriotic cells can be detected from lesion biopsies,
and can serve as diagnostic markers for endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC4227690
PMID: 25386850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 26;289(52):36101-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.598383. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

MicroRNA-200 (miR-200) cluster regulation by achaete scute-like 2 (Ascl2): impact
on the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colon cancer cells.

Tian Y(1), Pan Q(1), Shang Y(1), Zhu R(2), Ye J(1), Liu Y(1), Zhong X(1), Li
S(1), He Y(1), Chen L(1), Zhao J(1), Chen W(1), Peng Z(3), Wang R(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Gastroenterology of People's Liberation Army, Southwest 
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China and. (2)From
the Institute of Gastroenterology of People's Liberation Army, Southwest
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China and
Department of Gastroenterology, Zunyi Medical University, Guizhou 563000, China. 
(3)From the Institute of Gastroenterology of People's Liberation Army, Southwest 
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China and
pengzhh@yahoo.com.cn. (4)From the Institute of Gastroenterology of People's
Liberation Army, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400038, China and rongquanw@hotmail.com.

Ascl2, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is a downstream target of
WNT signaling that controls the fate of intestinal cryptic stem cells and colon
cancer progenitor cells. However, its involvement in colon cancer and downstream 
molecular events is largely undefined; in particular, the mechanism by which
Ascl2 regulates the plasticity of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) programs in colon cancer cells remains
unknown. In this study, we systematically demonstrate that Ascl2 loss of function
in colon cancer cells promotes MET by derepressing the expression of microRNA
(miR)-200s (i.e. miR-200b, miR-200a, miR-429, miR-200c, and miR-141) and further 
activating their expression through a transcriptional mechanism that involves
direct binding to the most proximal E-box (E-box2) in the miR-200b-a-429
promoter. Activation of miR-200s due to Ascl2 deficiency led to the inhibition of
ZEB1/2 expression and the alteration of epithelial and mesenchymal features.
Transfection of miR-200b, miR-200a, and miR-429 inhibitors into Ascl2-deficient
colon cancer cells promoted the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in a reversible
manner. Transfection of miR-200a or miR-429 inhibitors into Ascl2-deficient colon
cancer cells increased cellular proliferation and migration. Ascl2 mRNA levels
and the miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-141, or miR-429 levels in the colon
cancerous samples were inversely correlated. These results provide the first
evidence of a link between Ascl2 and miR-200s in the regulation of EMT-MET
plasticity in colon cancer.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4276874
PMID: 25371200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Oral Pathol Med. 2015 Oct;44(9):693-8. doi: 10.1111/jop.12286. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

ZEB1 as an indicator of tumor recurrence for areca quid chewing-associated oral
squamous cell carcinomas.

Ho CM(1), Hu FW(2,)(3), Lee SS(4), Shieh TM(5), Yu CH(2,)(3,)(6), Lin SS(2,)(3), 
Yu CC(2,)(3,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Maxillofacial Surgery, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi
Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan. (2)School of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)Department of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)School of Public Health, Chung Shan
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Department of Dental Hygiene, College of
Health Care, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Institute of Oral
Sciences, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the sixth most prevalent
malignancy worldwide and the third most common cancer in developing nation. Most 
OSCC patients relapse within months after receiving treatment. Therefore,
searching the biomarkers of recurrence is urgently required to improve OSCC
patient survival.
METHODS: We set out to explore whether expression of ZEB1 could be triggered in
oral epithelial cells (SG and FaDu) by arecoline in vitro. Control and
ZEB1-knockdown arecoline-stimulated SG and FaDu were subjected to
migration/invasiveness/anchorage-independent growth assay. Primary and recurrent 
OSCC tissues from areca quid chewers were analyzed using real-time RT-PCR
analysis for ZEB1 expression.
RESULTS: Arecoline led to dose-dependent elevation of ZEB1 expression in SG and
FaDu cells. Downregulation of ZEB1 by lentiviral infection significantly reversed
arecoline-induced oncogenicity including migration ability, cell invasiveness,
and anchorage-independent growth in SG and FaDu cells. Clinically, the level of
ZEB1 expression was higher in recurrent OSCC tumor samples but lower in primary
lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeting ZEB1 might offer a new strategy for the treatment of OSCC 
patients. ZEB1 can serve as a progression and relapse marker in OSCC patients.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25367287  [PubMed - in process]


304. Front Med. 2014 Dec;8(4):456-63. doi: 10.1007/s11684-014-0353-z. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Effects of miR-200c on the migration and invasion abilities of human prostate
cancer Du145 cells and the corresponding mechanism.

Shi R(1), Xiao H, Yang T, Chang L, Tian Y, Wu B, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) have played a key role in human tumorigenesis, tumor
progression, and metastasis. On the one hand, miRNAs are aberrantly expressed in 
many types of human cancer; on the other hand, miRNAs can function as tumor
suppressors or oncogenes that target many cancer-related genes. This study aimed 
to investigate the effects of miRNA-200c (miR-200c) on the biological behavior
and mechanism of proliferation, migration, and invasion in the prostate cancer
cell line Du145. In this study, Du145 cells were transfected with miR-200c mimics
or negative control miR-NC by using an X-tremeGENE siRNA transfection reagent.
The relative expression of miR-200c was measured by RT-PCR. The proliferation,
migration, and invasion abilities of Du145 cells were detected by CCK8 assays,
migration assays and invasion assays, respectively. The expressions of ZEB1,
E-cadherin, and vimentin were observed by western blot. Results showed that DU145
cells exhibited a high expression of miR-200c compared with immortalized normal
prostate epithelial cell RWPE-1. Du145 cells were then transfected with miR-200c 
mimics and displayed lower abilities of proliferation, migration, and invasion
than those transfected with the negative control. The protein levels of ZEB1 and 
vimentin were expressed at a low extent in Du145 cells, which were transfected
with miR-200c mimics; by contrast, E-cadherin was highly expressed. Hence,
miR-200c could significantly inhibit the proliferation of the prostate cancer
cell line Du145; likewise, miR-200c could inhibit migration and invasion by
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

PMID: 25363395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. BMC Pulm Med. 2014 Oct 31;14:168. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-14-168.

Clinical significance of mTOR, ZEB1, ROCK1 expression in lung tissues of
pulmonary fibrosis patients.

Park JS, Park HJ, Park YS, Lee SM, Yim JJ, Yoo CG, Han SK, Kim YW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul National
University Hospital, Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea.
ywkim@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a fatal lung disease of
unknown causes. Three proteins (mammalian target of rapamycin, mTOR; zinc finger 
E-box-binding homeobox 1, ZEB1; Rho-associated, coiled-coil containing protein
kinase 1, ROCK1) may be related to pulmonary fibrosis. However, they have not
been assessed in human pulmonary fibrosis. We assessed the clinical significance 
of mTOR, ZEB1, and ROCK1 expression in human pulmonary fibrosis of usual
interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern.
METHODS: The mTOR, ZEB1, and ROCK1 expression was evaluated by
immunohistochemical staining of 30 surgical lung biopsy tissues from 26 IPF and 4
UIP pattern connective tissue disease related interstitial lung disease (CTD-ILD)
patients. The expression scores correlated with the clinical features.
RESULTS: The mTOR, ZEB1 and ROCK1 mainly expressed in alveolar epithelial cells
of UIP lungs. The histological fibrosis scores and lung function decline in the
strong mTOR expression group were higher than those in the weak and intermediate 
expression group. Patients with positive ZEB1 expression had higher fibrosis
scores and greater decline in carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO) than
patients with negative ZEB1 expression. Patients with positive mTOR or ZEB1
expression had poorer prognosis than that of patients with negative mTOR or ZEB1 
expression, although it was not statistically significant. ROCK1 was not
associated with the studied clinicopathological features.
CONCLUSIONS: The mTOR and ZEB1 expression in pulmonary fibrosis patients
significantly correlated with the fibrosis score and lung function decline,
indicating that it may be related to the prognosis of pulmonary fibrosis. Further
studies involving large numbers of homogeneous IPF patients are warranted.

PMCID: PMC4233073
PMID: 25358403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Int J Cancer. 2015 May 15;136(10):2304-15. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29296. Epub 2014 Nov 
11.

Tetraspanin CD63 acts as a pro-metastatic factor via ß-catenin stabilization.

Seubert B(1), Cui H, Simonavicius N, Honert K, Schäfer S, Reuning U, Heikenwalder
M, Mari B, Krüger A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Oncology and Therapy Research and Institute of
Molecular Immunology, Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technische Universität
München, München, Germany.

The tetraspanin CD63 is implicated in pro-metastatic signaling pathways but, so
far, it is unclear, how CD63 levels affect the tumor cell phenotype. Here, we
investigated the effect of CD63 modulation in different metastatic tumor cell
lines. In vitro, knock down of CD63 induced a more epithelial-like phenotype
concomitant with increased E-cadherin expression, downregulation of its
repressors Slug and Zeb1, and decreased N-cadherin. In addition, ß-catenin
protein was markedly reduced, negatively affecting expression of the target genes
MMP-2 and PAI-1. ß-catenin inhibitors mimicked the epithelial phenotype induced
by CD63 knock down. Inhibition of ß-catenin upstream regulators PI3K/AKT or GSK3ß
could rescue the mesenchymal phenotype underlining the importance of the
ß-catenin pathway in CD63-regulated cell plasticity. CD63 knock down-induced
phenotypical changes correlated with a decrease of experimental metastasis
whereas CD63 overexpression enhanced the tumor cell-intrinsic metastatic
potential. Taken together, our data show that CD63 is a crucial player in the
regulation of the tumor cell-intrinsic metastatic potential by affecting cell
plasticity.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25354204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Genes Cancer. 2014 Sep;5(9-10):353-64.

miR-155 induced transcriptome changes in the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line leads 
to enhanced mitogen activated protein kinase signaling.

Martin EC(1), Krebs AE(1), Burks HE(1), Elliott S(1), Baddoo M(2), Collins-Burow 
BM(1), Flemington EK(2), Burow ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine-Section of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Tulane
University, New Orleans, LA. (2)Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA ; Department of Pathology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA.
(3)Department of Medicine-Section of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Tulane
University, New Orleans, LA ; Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA ; Department of Pharmacology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA.

A single microRNA (miRNA) has the potential to regulate thousands of genes and
thus govern multiple signaling pathways at once. miR-155 is an oncogenic miRNA
which regulates many cellular pathways, designating it as a multifaceted
regulator of proliferation, chemo-resistance, and apoptosis. While many singular 
targeted effects of miR-155 have been defined and an oncogenic role has been
attributed to miR-155 expression, the global effect of miR-155 on the cellular
transcriptomes of an ER(+) breast cancer cell line has yet to be determined. Here
we demonstrate that miR-155 expression increases tumorigenesis in vivo and we
determine miR-155 mediated transcriptome changes through next generation
sequencing analysis. miR-155 expression alters many signaling pathways, with the 
chief altered pathway being the MAPK signaling cascade and miR-155 induces
shortening of target mRNA 3'UTRs and alternative isoform expression of MAPK
related genes. In addition there is an observed increase in protein
phosphorylation of components of MAPK signaling including ERK1/2 and AP-1 complex
members (Fra-1 and c-Fos) as well as elevated gene expression of MAPK regulated
genes Zeb1, Snail, Plaur, and SerpinE1.

PMCID: PMC4209600
PMID: 25352952  [PubMed]


308. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 29;5:5203. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6203.

Hypoxia promotes stem cell phenotypes and poor prognosis through epigenetic
regulation of DICER.

van den Beucken T(1), Koch E(2), Chu K(3), Rupaimoole R(4), Prickaerts P(5),
Adriaens M(6), Voncken JW(5), Harris AL(7), Buffa FM(7), Haider S(3), Starmans
MH(8), Yao CQ(9), Ivan M(10), Ivan C(11), Pecot CV(12), Boutros PC(13), Sood
AK(14), Koritzinsky M(15), Wouters BG(16).

Author information: 
(1)1] Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer
Research, University Health Network, 101 College Street, Room 12-310, Toronto
Medical Discovery Tower, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Department of
Radiation Oncology, GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands [3]
Department of Toxicogenomics, GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands. (2)1] 
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer
Research, University Health Network, 101 College Street, Room 12-310, Toronto
Medical Discovery Tower, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7.
(3)Informatics and Bio-computing Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (4)Departments of Gynecologic Oncology and
Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Genetics, GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, 6200 MD Maastricht, 
The Netherlands. (6)1] Department of Experimental Cardiology, Heart Failure
Research Centre, Academic Medical Center, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands [2] 
Department of Bioinformatics-BiGCaT, Maastricht University, 6200 MD Maastricht,
The Netherlands. (7)Cancer Research UK Department of Oncology, The Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.
(8)1] Department of Radiation Oncology, GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, 6200 MD Maastricht, 
The Netherlands [2] Informatics and Bio-computing Program, Ontario Institute for 
Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (9)1] Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2]
Informatics and Bio-computing Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (10)Department of Medicine, The Indiana
University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.
(11)Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNAs, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (12)Department of Thoracic,
Head and Neck Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (13)1] Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Informatics and Bio-computing
Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 
[3] Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8. (14)1] Departments of Gynecologic Oncology and Cancer
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA [2] Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNAs, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (15)1] Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research, University
Health Network, 101 College Street, Room 12-310, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8 [3] Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 1P5. (16)1] Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research, University
Health Network, 101 College Street, Room 12-310, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Department of Radiation Oncology, GROW
School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical
Center, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands [3] Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [4] Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 1P5 [5]
Selective Therapies Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7.

MicroRNAs are small regulatory RNAs that post transcriptionally control gene
expression. Reduced expression of DICER, the enzyme involved in microRNA
processing, is frequently observed in cancer and is associated with poor clinical
outcome in various malignancies. Yet, the underlying mechanisms are not well
understood. Here we identify tumour hypoxia as a regulator of DICER expression in
large cohorts of breast cancer patients. We show that DICER expression is
suppressed by hypoxia through an epigenetic mechanism that involves inhibition of
oxygen-dependent H3K27me3 demethylases KDM6A/B and results in silencing of the
DICER promoter. Subsequently, reduced miRNA processing leads to derepression of
the miR-200 target ZEB1, stimulates the epithelial to mesenchymal transition and 
ultimately results in the acquisition of stem cell phenotypes in human mammary
epithelial cells. Our study uncovers a previously unknown relationship between
oxygen-sensitive epigenetic regulators, miRNA biogenesis and tumour stem cell
phenotypes that may underlie poor outcome in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4255228
PMID: 25351418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 28;5:5241. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6241.

Metastasis is regulated via microRNA-200/ZEB1 axis control of tumour cell PD-L1
expression and intratumoral immunosuppression.

Chen L(1), Gibbons DL(2), Goswami S(3), Cortez MA(3), Ahn YH(4), Byers LA(3),
Zhang X(5), Yi X(5), Dwyer D(5), Lin W(3), Diao L(6), Wang J(6), Roybal JD(3),
Patel M(3), Ungewiss C(3), Peng D(3), Antonia S(7), Mediavilla-Varela M(7),
Robertson G(8), Jones S(8), Suraokar M(9), Welsh JW(10), Erez B(3), Wistuba
II(9), Chen L(11), Peng D(12), Wang S(12), Ullrich SE(5), Heymach JV(3), Kurie
JM(3), Qin FX(13).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of
Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (2)1] Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2]
Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (3)Department of Thoracic/Head
and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)1] Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA [2] Department of Molecular Medicine, Ewha Womans University School of
Medicine, 1071 Anyangcheon-ro, Yangcheon-gu, Seoul 158-710, Korea. (5)Department 
of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA. (6)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(7)Department of Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida 33612, 
USA. (8)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V5Z 4S6. (9)1] Department of Thoracic/Head
and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of Translational and Molecular
Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (10)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (11)Department of
Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, 10 Amistad Street, New Haven, Connecticut
06519, USA. (12)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education
and State Key Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou
510275, China. (13)1] Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2]
Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry 
of Education and State Key Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510275, China.

Immunosuppression of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) is a common feature of
advanced cancer, but its biological basis has remained obscure. We demonstrate
here a molecular link between epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
CD8(+) TIL immunosuppression, two key drivers of cancer progression. We show that
microRNA-200 (miR-200), a cell-autonomous suppressor of EMT and metastasis,
targets PD-L1. Moreover, ZEB1, an EMT activator and transcriptional repressor of 
miR-200, relieves miR-200 repression of PD-L1 on tumour cells, leading to CD8(+) 
T-cell immunosuppression and metastasis. These findings are supported by robust
correlations between the EMT score, miR-200 levels and PD-L1 expression in
multiple human lung cancer datasets. In addition to revealing a link between EMT 
and T-cell dysfunction, these findings also show that ZEB1 promotes metastasis
through a heretofore unappreciated cell non-autonomous mechanism, and suggest
that subgroups of patients in whom malignant progression is driven by EMT
activators may respond to treatment with PD-L1 antagonists.

PMCID: PMC4212319
PMID: 25348003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Pathol Int. 2014 Nov;64(11):560-8. doi: 10.1111/pin.12214. Epub 2014 Oct 27.

Immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of E-cadherin and ZEB1 in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Matsubara D(1), Kishaba Y, Yoshimoto T, Sakuma Y, Sakatani T, Tamura T, Endo S,
Sugiyama Y, Murakami Y, Niki T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Integrative Pathology, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan.

We performed an immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of zinc-finger
E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), a master regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), and determined its relationship with E-cadherin in 157
non-small cell lung carcinomas (93 adenocarcinomas, 36 squamous cell carcinomas, 
18 large cell carcinomas, and 10 pleomorphic carcinomas). Although the expression
of E-cadherin was low in the subset of adenocarcinomas (10%) and squamous cell
carcinomas (11%), ZEB1 expression was only observed in one case of squamous cell 
carcinoma and none of the adenocarcinomas. In contrast, the low expression of
E-cadherin (50% and 90%, respectively) and the positive expression of ZEB1 (11%
and 50%, respectively) were more frequently observed in poorly differentiated
carcinomas (large cell carcinomas and pleomorphic carcinomas). Overall, the
expression of ZEB1 was inversely correlated with that of E-cadherin. Furthermore,
the distribution of ZEB1-positive cancer cells was more restricted than in the
area in which the expression of E-cadherin was lost, and the former was detected 
within the latter. We concluded that the expression of ZEB1 was not necessarily
associated with the low expression of E-cadherin in lung adenocarcinomas and
squamous cell carcinomas. The expression of ZEB1 correlated with an
undifferentiated and/or sarcomatoid morphology that may occur in the late stage
of EMT.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25347933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Nov;16(11):1092-104. doi: 10.1038/ncb3050. Epub 2014 Oct 26.

ASPP2 controls epithelial plasticity and inhibits metastasis through
ß-catenin-dependent regulation of ZEB1.

Wang Y(1), Bu F(2), Royer C(1), Serres S(3), Larkin JR(3), Soto MS(3), Sibson
NR(3), Salter V(1), Fritzsche F(4), Turnquist C(1), Koch S(1), Zak J(1), Zhong
S(1), Wu G(5), Liang A(5), Olofsen PA(1), Moch H(6), Hancock DC(7), Downward
J(7), Goldin RD(8), Zhao J(2), Tong X(2), Guo Y(2), Lu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK. (2)1] International Joint
Cancer Institute &Eastern Hospital of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China [2] PLA General Hospital Cancer
Center, PLA Postgraduate School of Medicine, 28 Fuxing Road Beijing 100853,
China. (3)Cancer Research UK and Medical Research Council Oxford Institute for
Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LE,
UK. (4)1] Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Nuffield Department of
Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK [2] Institute of
Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Guangxi Cancer Hospital, Guangxi Medical University, Guangxi 530021, China.
(6)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8091 Zurich,
Switzerland. (7)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn
Fields London WC2A 3LY, UK. (8)Centre for Pathology, St Mary's Hospital, Imperial
College, London W2 1NY, UK.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and the reverse mesenchymal to
epithelial transition (MET), are known examples of epithelial plasticity that are
important in kidney development and cancer metastasis. Here we identify ASPP2, a 
haploinsufficient tumour suppressor, p53 activator and PAR3 binding partner, as a
molecular switch of MET and EMT. ASPP2 contributes to MET in mouse kidney in
vivo. Mechanistically, ASPP2 induces MET through its PAR3-binding amino-terminus,
independently of p53 binding. ASPP2 prevents ß-catenin from transactivating ZEB1,
directly by forming an ASPP2-ß-catenin-E-cadherin ternary complex and indirectly 
by inhibiting ß-catenin's N-terminal phosphorylation to stabilize the
ß-catenin-E-cadherin complex. ASPP2 limits the pro-invasive property of oncogenic
RAS and inhibits tumour metastasis in vivo. Reduced ASPP2 expression results in
EMT, and is associated with poor survival in hepatocellular carcinoma and breast 
cancer patients. Hence, ASPP2 is a key regulator of epithelial plasticity that
connects cell polarity to the suppression of WNT signalling, EMT and tumour
metastasis.

PMID: 25344754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J R Soc Interface. 2014 Dec 6;11(101):20140962. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0962.

Towards elucidating the connection between epithelial-mesenchymal transitions and
stemness.

Jolly MK(1), Huang B(2), Lu M(3), Mani SA(4), Levine H(5), Ben-Jacob E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA. (2)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA. (3)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA. (4)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Metastasis Research Center, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice
University, Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA Department of Bioengineering, Rice
University, Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rice
University, Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA herbert.levine@rice.edu. (6)Center for
Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA
Department of Biosciences, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA School of
Physics and Astronomy and The Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel eshel@rice.edu.

Epithelial cells undergoing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions have often been
shown to behave as cancer stem cells, but the precise molecular connection
remains elusive. At the genetic level, stemness is governed by LIN28/let-7 double
inhibition switch, whereas EMT/MET is controlled by miR-200/ZEB double inhibition
circuit and LIN28 is inhibited by miR-200, coupling the two modules. Here, using 
a specially devised theoretical framework to investigate the dynamics of the
LIN28/let-7 system, we show that it can operate as a three-way switch (between
low, high and intermediate LIN28 levels termed the D, U and hybrid D/U states)
similar to the three-way operation of the miR-200/ZEB circuit that allows for the
existence of a hybrid epithelial/mesenchymal (E/M) phenotype. We find significant
correspondence between the existence of the three states of the two circuits:
E-D, M-U and E/M-D/U. Incorporating the activation of OCT4 by LIN28, we find that
the hybrid E/M phenotype has high likelihood (when compared with either the E or 
M states) to gain stemness. Combining the LIN28/let-7 regulation by NF-<U+03BA>B and
c-MYC, we find that NF-<U+03BA>B, but not c-MYC, elevates the likelihood of E/M
phenotype to gain stemness. Our results are consistent with emerging concept that
partial EMT can lead to stemness.

© 2014 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4223923
PMID: 25339690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. HNO. 2014 Dec;62(12):867-72. doi: 10.1007/s00106-014-2931-4.

[Cancer stem cell phenotypes and miRNA: therapeutic targets in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in German]

Coordes A(1), Zhifeng S, Sangvatanakul V, Qian X, Lenarz M, Kaufmann AM, Albers
AE.

Author information: 
(1)Hals-, Nasen- und Ohrenklinik, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Deutschland.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most
common cancer worldwide. HNSCC is caused by persistent high-risk human
papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infection or excessive consumption of alcohol or tobacco.
The persistently low survival rates result from local recurrences and metastases,
which are probably caused by so-called tumor stem cells (TSCs). The
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) or transformation is a key event in
metastasis initiation and is being increasingly associated with TSCs.
OBJECTIVES: This review describes new therapeutic targets in HNSCC, focusing on
the TSC hypothesis and EMT regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS, RESULTS: TSCs and EMT are regulated directly and
indirectly via transcription factors and microRNAs (miRNAs). These miRNAs
regulate multiple cellular processes and may serve as new therapeutic targets,
whose modulation could increase the effectiveness of HNSCC treatments.
Post-transcriptionally, miRNAs regulate transcription factors associated with EMT
(ZEB1/2, EZH2, Bmi-1), tumor suppressors (p53), TSC markers (ALDH, CD44, EpCAM,
p63) and both epithelial (E-cadherin) and mesenchymal markers (vimentin).
CONCLUSION: Alterations in HNSSC TSC miRNA expression before and after
chemotherapy could potentially serve as a therapeutic control. In the long term, 
knowledge of a patient's individual protein expression pattern may permit
application of specific chemotherapy. Such individualized therapy might prohibit 
the development of metastases and potentially unresectable recurrences with a
high resistance to radiation and chemotherapy, thus improving the prognosis in
HNSCC patients.

PMID: 25337967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10840-53.

CDKL2 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and breast cancer progression.

Li L(1), Liu C(2), Amato RJ(3), Chang JT(4), Du G(5), Li W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Therapeutics Institute, Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas.
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing, China. (2)Texas Therapeutics Institute, Brown Foundation
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, Texas. (3)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, and Memorial Hermann Cancer Center, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Integrative Biology and
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, Texas. School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas. (5)Department of Integrative
Biology and Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas. (6)Texas Therapeutics Institute, Brown
Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas. Division of Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, and Memorial Hermann Cancer Center, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas. Cancer Biology Program, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, Texas.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) confers mesenchymal properties on
epithelial cells and has been closely associated with the acquisition of
aggressive traits by epithelial cancer cells. To identify novel regulators of
EMT, we carried out cDNA screens that covered 500 human kinases. Subsequent
characterization of candidate kinases led us to uncover cyclin-dependent
kinase-like 2 (CDKL2) as a novel potent promoter for EMT and breast cancer
progression. CDKL2-expressing human mammary gland epithelial cells displayed
enhanced mesenchymal traits and stem cell-like phenotypes, which was acquired
through activating a ZEB1/E-cadherin/ß-catenin positive feedback loop and
regulating CD44 mRNA alternative splicing to promote conversion of CD24(high)
cells to CD44(high) cells. Furthermore, CDKL2 enhanced primary tumor formation
and metastasis in a breast cancer xenograft model. Notably, CDKL2 is expressed
significantly higher in mesenchymal human breast cancer cell lines than in
epithelial lines, and its over-expression/amplification in human breast cancers
is associated with shorter disease-free survival. Taken together, our study
uncovered a major role for CDKL2 in promoting EMT and breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4279414
PMID: 25333262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2014 Sep-Oct;11(5):259-66.

Transcriptome analysis of CD133-positive stem cells and prognostic value of
survivin in colorectal cancer.

Kim ST(1), Sohn I(2), DO IG(3), Jang J(4), Kim SH(3), Jung IH(5), Park JO(1),
Park YS(1), Talasaz A(6), Lee J(1), Kim HC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea Colorectal Cancer Center,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (2)Center for Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, Samsung
Medical Cancer, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea Colorectal Cancer Center, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (5)Center for Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, Samsung
Medical Cancer, Seoul, Republic of Korea Samsung Advanced Institute for Health
Science and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Stanford Genome Technology Center, Department of Genetics, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, U.S.A. (7)Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of
Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea Colorectal Cancer Center, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIM: CD133 is an important, but not exclusive, biomarker of colorectal
cancer (CRC) stem cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to identify other CRC stem cell-specific genes,
we performed a comparative expression profiling of CD133(+) and CD133(-) cell
populations in primary and metastatic tumors from four patients with CRC.
CD133(+) and CD133(-) CRC cells were isolated using MagSweeper and used for
whole-transcriptome analysis with RNA-Seq.
RESULTS: We found that in CD133(+) cells, 17 genes (RNASE2, PRB2, IL4, MGC27382, 
CLEC4C, SALL3, GIMAP1, ISG15, LOC728875, ZIK1, ICAM2, CCDC7, CDYL2, LRRC2, ZEB1, 
OSTF1 and CCDC144B) were significantly up-regulated compared to CD133(-) CRC
cells. Among them, IL4 has been known as an inducer of survivin implicated in the
survival and proliferation of cancer cells. However, the prognostic value of
survivin in CRC is controversial. We evaluated survivin expression in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor samples of 188 patients with CRC by
immunohistochemistry. Survivin over-expression was detected in 85 patients
(45.2%) and was significantly associated with primary tumor sites (p=0.028),
lymph node metastasis (p=0.029) and advanced III/IV CRC stages (AJCC 7; p=0.001).
Furthermore, survivin up-regulation correlated with reduced disease-free survival
(DFS; p=0.021) and overall survival (OS; p<0.000) and was proved to be an
independent prognostic factor for both DFS and OS in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that CD133(+) CRC stem cells have a distinct
expression pattern and that survivin, up-regulated by differentially expressed
IL-4, is a candidate biomarker for the prediction of recurrence and survival in
CRC.

Copyright© 2014, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25331798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cancer Med. 2015 Jan;4(1):125-35. doi: 10.1002/cam4.347. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

dEF1 associates with DNMT1 and maintains DNA methylation of the E-cadherin
promoter in breast cancer cells.

Fukagawa A(1), Ishii H, Miyazawa K, Saitoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Yamanashi Yamanashi, Yamanashi,
Chuo, 409-3898, Japan; Research Training Program for Undergraduates,
Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering, University of
Yamanashi Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Chuo, 409-3898, Japan.

Abnormal DNA methylation at the C-5 position of cytosine (5mC) of CpG
dinucleotides is a well-known epigenetic feature of cancer. Levels of E-cadherin,
which is regularly expressed in epithelial tissues, are frequently reduced in
epithelial tumors due to transcriptional repression, sometimes accompanied by
hypermethylation of the promoter region. dEF1 family proteins (dEF1/ZEB1 and
SIP1/ZEB2), key regulators of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
suppress E-cadherin expression at the transcriptional level. We recently showed
that levels of mRNAs encoding dEF1 proteins are regulated reciprocally with
E-cadherin level in breast cancer cells. Here, we examined the mechanism
underlying downregulation of E-cadherin expression in three basal-type breast
cancer cells in which the E-cadherin promoter region is hypermethylated (Hs578T) 
or moderately methylated (BT549 and MDA-MB-231). Regardless of methylation
status, treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza), which inhibits DNA
methyltransferases, had no effect on E-cadherin expression. Knockdown of dEF1 and
SIP1 resulted in recovery of E-cadherin expression in cells lacking
hypermethylation, whereas combined treatment with 5-aza synergistically restored 
E-cadherin expression, especially when the E-cadherin promoter was
hypermethylated. Moreover, dEF1 interacted with DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1)
through the Smad-binding domain. Sustained knockdown of dEF1 family proteins
reduced the number of 5mC sites in the E-cadherin promoter region, suggesting
that these proteins maintain 5mC through interaction with DNMT1 in breast cancer 
cells. Thus, dEF1 family proteins appear to repress expression of E-cadherin
during cancer progression, both directly at the transcriptional level and
indirectly at the epigenetic level.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4312126
PMID: 25315069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jan 28;356(2 Pt B):613-27. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.10.008.
Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Mutated K-ras activates CDK8 to stimulate the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in pancreatic cancer in part via the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Xu W(1), Wang Z(2), Zhang W(1), Qian K(1), Li H(1), Kong D(1), Li Y(1), Tang
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, China. Electronic address: wangziwei571@sina.com.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (CDK8), a gene encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK) component of the Mediator complex, is known as a colon cancer oncogene. Our
recent study showed that CDK8 plays an important role in the formation of
pancreatic cancer, but the CDK8 expression levels were not completely identical
in different pancreatic cancer samples. The level of CDK8 expression depended on 
whether the K-ras gene was mutated; its expression was much higher in samples
carrying a K-ras mutation than in wild-type K-ras samples. Moreover, CDK8
expression was reduced following mutated K-ras knockdown in K-ras-mutated
pancreatic cancer cells, whereas CDK8 expression was increased following
expression of mutated K-ras in wild-type K-ras cells. Our study demonstrates that
mutated K-ras stimulates CDK8 expression, possibly by regulating HIF-1a, and both
CDK8 and mutated K-ras were confirmed to promote cell proliferation and prevent
apoptosis in vitro. Additionally, we found that both CDK8 and mutated K-ras
promote the invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer cells via the positive
regulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, thereby increasing the
expression of Snail1 and ZEB1, which act as important stimulating factors of the 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Finally, knockdown of either CDK8 or 
mutated K-ras contributed to attenuated pancreatic cancer growth in BALB/c nude
mice. In conclusion, these findings demonstrate that mutated K-ras promotes CDK8 
expression and that the regulatory effects of CDK8 on the EMT are partially
attributed to the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25305448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Feb;22(2):336-50. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.157. Epub 2014
Oct 10.

Fra-1/AP-1 induces EMT in mammary epithelial cells by modulating Zeb1/2 and TGFß 
expression.

Bakiri L(1), Macho-Maschler S(2), Custic I(3), Niemiec J(2), Guío-Carrión A(1),
Hasenfuss SC(1), Eger A(4), Müller M(2), Beug H(5), Wagner EF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genes, Development and Disease Group, F-BBVA Cancer Cell Biology Programme,
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. (2)Institute for Animal
Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria. (4)IMC University 
of Applied Sciences, Krems, Austria. (5)1] Institute for Animal Breeding and
Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria [2] Research
Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is essential for embryonic
morphogenesis and wound healing and critical for tumour cell invasion and
dissemination. The AP-1 transcription factor Fra-1 has been implicated in
tumorigenesis and in tumour-associated EMT in human breast cancer. We observed a 
significant inverse correlation between Fra-1 mRNA expression and
distant-metastasis-free survival in a large cohort of breast cancer patients
derived from multiple array data sets. This unique correlation among Fos genes
prompted us to assess the evolutionary conservation between Fra-1 functions in
EMT of human and mouse cells. Ectopic expression of Fra-1 in fully polarized,
non-tumourigenic, mouse mammary epithelial EpH4 cells induced a mesenchymal
phenotype, characterized by a loss of epithelial and gain of mesenchymal markers.
Proliferation, motility and invasiveness were also increased in the resulting
EpFra1 cells, and the cells were tumourigenic and efficiently colonized the lung 
upon transplantation. Molecular analyses revealed increased expression of Tgfß1
and the EMT-inducing transcription factors Zeb1, Zeb2 and Slug. Mechanistically, 
Fra-1 binds to the tgfb1 and zeb2 promoters and to an evolutionarily conserved
region in the first intron of zeb1. Furthermore, increased activity of a zeb2
promoter reporter was detected in EpFra1 cells and shown to depend on
AP-1-binding sites. Inhibiting TGFß signalling in EpFra1 cells moderately
increased the expression of epithelial markers, whereas silencing of zeb1 or zeb2
restored the epithelial phenotype and decreased migration in vitro and
tumorigenesis in vivo. Thus Fra-1 induces changes in the expression of genes
encoding EMT-related transcription factors leading to the acquisition of
mesenchymal, invasive and tumorigenic capacities by epithelial cells. This study 
defines a novel function of Fra-1/AP-1 in modulating tgfb1, zeb1 and zeb2
expression through direct binding to genomic regulatory regions, which
establishes a basis for future in vivo genetic manipulations and preclinical
studies using mouse models.

PMCID: PMC4291495
PMID: 25301070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Oncol. 2015 Feb;9(2):355-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 Sep
22.

Enhanced expression of retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) induces
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and disruption of mammary acinar structures.

Doi A(1), Ishikawa K(2), Shibata N(3), Ito E(4), Fujimoto J(5), Yamamoto M(3),
Shiga H(6), Mochizuki H(6), Kawamura Y(6), Goshima N(7), Semba K(8), Watanabe
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science 
and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan. Electronic address: ad0i_i0da@yahoo.co.jp. (2)Department of Life
Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering,
Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan; Japan
Biological Informatics Consortium (JBiC), 2-45 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8073,
Japan. Electronic address: IshikawaKosuke@gmail.com. (3)Department of Life
Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering,
Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.
(4)Division of Gene Expression Analysis, Translational Research Center (Tokyo
Branch), Fukushima Medical University, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 151-0051, Japan.
(5)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science 
and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan; Japan Biological Informatics Consortium (JBiC), 2-45 Aomi,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8073, Japan. (6)Japan Biological Informatics Consortium
(JBiC), 2-45 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8073, Japan. (7)Quantitative Proteomics
Team, Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery (molprof), National 
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2-4-7 Aomi,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan. (8)Department of Life Science and Medical
Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2
Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan; Division of Gene Function
Analysis, Translational Research Center, Fukushima Medical University, 1
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima-city, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan. Electronic address:
ksemba@waseda.jp.

The early steps of mammary tumorigenesis include loss of epithelial cell
polarity, escape from anoikis, and acquisition of proliferative capacity. The
genes responsible for these processes are predicted to be early diagnostic
markers or new therapeutic targets. Here we tested 51 genes coamplified with
ERBB2 in the 17q12-21 amplicon for these tumorigenic activities using an MCF10A
3D culture-based screening system. We found that overexpression of retinoic acid 
receptor a (RARA) disrupted normal acinar structure and induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The mRNA levels of known EMT-inducing
factors, including SLUG, FOXC2, ZEB1, and ZEB2, were significantly increased upon
RARA overexpression. Knockdown of ZEB1 suppressed the RARA-mediated EMT
phenotype. These results suggest that overexpression of RARA enhances malignant
transformation during mammary tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25300573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biomed Sci. 2014 Oct 7;21:97. doi: 10.1186/s12929-014-0097-8.

Up-regulation of S100A16 expression promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition
via Notch1 pathway in breast cancer.

Zhou W(1), Pan H(2), Xia T(3), Xue J(4), Cheng L(5), Fan P(6), Zhang Y(7), Zhu
W(8), Xue Y(9), Liu X(10), Ding Q(11), Liu Y(12), Wang S(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing
Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing, China.
zhouwenbin@njmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing,
China. pamghong@163.com. (3)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing,
China. xiatsswms@163.com. (4)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing,
China. 953037914@qq.com. (5)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing,
China. 694427729@qq.com. (6)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, 20057, USA. njfanping@hotmail.com.
(7)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing University
Medical School, 321 Zhongshan Road, 210008, Nanjing, China.
yifen1989@yahoo.com.cn. (8)Department of Urology, Zhongda Hospital Affiliated to 
Southeast University, Nanjing, 210008, China. mspublic@foxmail.com. (9)Department
of Geratology, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300
Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing, China. 493602870@qq.com. (10)Department of
Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University,
300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing, China. liuxiaoan@126.com. (11)Department of 
Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University,
300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing, China. dingqiang@njmu.edu.cn. (12)Department
of Geratology, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300
Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing, China. liuyun@njmu.edu.cn. (13)Department of
Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University,
300 Guangzhou Road, 210029, Nanjing, China. ws0801@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Our previous studies demonstrated that S100A16 promotes adipogenesis 
and is involved in weight gain attenuation induced by dietary calcium. Till now, 
the function of S100A16 in the breast cancer remains to be elucidated.
RESULTS: In this study, we observed that S100A16 was expressed in higher levels
in human breast cancer tissues compared with paired adjacent non-cancerous
tissues. Further examination showed that overexpression of S100A16 in MCF-7 cells
could increase cell proliferation and colony formation. One major mechanistic
change was that S100A16 was able to up-regulate the transcription factors Notch1,
ZEB1, and ZEB2, which had the capacities to directly repress the expression of
epithelial markers E-cadherin and ß-catenin but increase mesenchymal markers
N-cadherin and vimentin, a characterized phenotype of epithelial-mensenchymal
transition (EMT). In addition to display with morphologic change, migration and
invasion were increased in S100A16 over-expressed MCF-7 cells. Importantly,
knockdown of Notch1 by specific siRNA could reverse the EMT induced by S100A16
overexpression, which confirmed that Notch1 played a critical role in the process
of EMT induced by S100A16.
CONCLUSIONS: All together, our data indicated that S100A16 had a potential
function to regulate some embryonic transcription factors to promote EMT in
breast cancer cells which may be an important target site for the therapy of
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4197258
PMID: 25287362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. BMC Med. 2014 Aug 7;12:121. doi: 10.1186/s12916-014-0121-6.

Ancestral exposure to stress epigenetically programs preterm birth risk and
adverse maternal and newborn outcomes.

Yao Y, Robinson AM, Zucchi FC, Robbins JC, Babenko O, Kovalchuk O, Kovalchuk I,
Olson DM, Metz GA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic stress is considered to be one of many causes of human
preterm birth (PTB), but no direct evidence has yet been provided. Here we show
in rats that stress across generations has downstream effects on endocrine,
metabolic and behavioural manifestations of PTB possibly via microRNA (miRNA)
regulation.
METHODS: Pregnant dams of the parental generation were exposed to stress from
gestational days 12 to 18. Their pregnant daughters (F1) and grand-daughters (F2)
either were stressed or remained as non-stressed controls. Gestational length,
maternal gestational weight gain, blood glucose and plasma corticosterone levels,
litter size and offspring weight gain from postnatal days 1 to 30 were recorded
in each generation, including F3. Maternal behaviours were analysed for the first
hour after completed parturition, and offspring sensorimotor development was
recorded on postnatal day (P) 7. F0 through F2 maternal brain frontal cortex,
uterus and placenta miRNA and gene expression patterns were used to identify
stress-induced epigenetic regulatory pathways of maternal behaviour and pregnancy
maintenance.
RESULTS: Progressively up to the F2 generation, stress gradually reduced
gestational length, maternal weight gain and behavioural activity, and increased 
blood glucose levels. Reduced offspring growth and delayed behavioural
development in the stress cohort was recognizable as early as P7, with the
greatest effect in the F3 offspring of transgenerationally stressed mothers.
Furthermore, stress altered miRNA expression patterns in the brain and uterus of 
F2 mothers, including the miR-200 family, which regulates pathways related to
brain plasticity and parturition, respectively. Main miR-200 family target genes 
in the uterus, Stat5b, Zeb1 and Zeb2, were downregulated by multigenerational
stress in the F1 generation. Zeb2 was also reduced in the stressed F2 generation,
suggesting a causal mechanism for disturbed pregnancy maintenance. Additionally, 
stress increased placental miR-181a, a marker of human PTB.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that a family history of stress may program
central and peripheral pathways regulating gestational length and maternal and
newborn health outcomes in the maternal lineage. This new paradigm may model the 
origin of many human PTB causes.

PMCID: PMC4244860
PMID: 25286408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 3;9(10):e109487. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109487.
eCollection 2014.

Highly adaptable triple-negative breast cancer cells as a functional model for
testing anticancer agents.

Singh B(1), Shamsnia A(1), Raythatha MR(1), Milligan RD(1), Cady AM(1), Madan
S(1), Lucci A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, and Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

A major obstacle in developing effective therapies against solid tumors stems
from an inability to adequately model the rare subpopulation of panresistant
cancer cells that may often drive the disease. We describe a strategy for
optimally modeling highly abnormal and highly adaptable human triple-negative
breast cancer cells, and evaluating therapies for their ability to eradicate such
cells. To overcome the shortcomings often associated with cell culture models, we
incorporated several features in our model including a selection of highly
adaptable cancer cells based on their ability to survive a metabolic challenge.
We have previously shown that metabolically adaptable cancer cells efficiently
metastasize to multiple organs in nude mice. Here we show that the cancer cells
modeled in our system feature an embryo-like gene expression and amplification of
the fat mass and obesity associated gene FTO. We also provide evidence of
upregulation of ZEB1 and downregulation of GRHL2 indicating increased epithelial 
to mesenchymal transition in metabolically adaptable cancer cells. Our results
obtained with a variety of anticancer agents support the validity of the model of
realistic panresistance and suggest that it could be used for developing
anticancer agents that would overcome panresistance.

PMCID: PMC4184880
PMID: 25279830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cancer Cell Int. 2014 Sep 9;14(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s12935-014-0072-1. eCollection
2014.

TGF-ß isoforms induce EMT independent migration of ovarian cancer cells.

Gao J(1), Zhu Y(1), Nilsson M(2), Sundfeldt K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Clinical Sciences,
Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Goteborg, SE-40530 Sweden.
(2)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg,
Goteborg, SE-40530 Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß) plays major roles in
tumorigenesis by regulating cell growth, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), migration/invasion and metastasis. The epithelial markers E-cadherin,
claudin-3 and claudin-4, commonly decreased in human adenocarcinomas are actually
up regulated during ovarian carcinogenesis. In human ovarian cancer TGF-ß1 may
either suppress or promote tumor progression, but whether other TGF-ß isoforms
(TGF-ß2 and TGF-ß3) exert similar effects is not known.
METHODS: In this study we investigated the ability of the TGF-ß isoforms
(TGF-ß1-3) to induce proliferation and migration by BrdU labeling, scratch wound 
and trans-filter migration assays in the human serous adenocarcinoma cell-line
NIH-OVCAR3. Transepithelial resistance was measured and EMT observed by
light-microscopy. Expression of adherens-, tight-junction and EMT-related
transcription factors was analyzed by qRT-PCR and immunoblotting.
RESULTS: All TGF-ß isoforms dose-dependently inhibited NIH-OVCAR3 cell growth,
stimulated tumor cell migration with similar efficiency. The mesenchymal marker
N-cadherin and claudin-1 expression was induced and occludin down regulated.
However, migrating cells retained an epithelial shape and E-cadherin expression. 
The E-cadherin repressor SNAIL mRNA levels remained low independently of TGF-ß1-3
treatment while ZEB1 expression was enhanced.
CONCLUSIONS: TGF-ß1, TGF-ß2 and TGF-ß3 promote migration of NIH-OVCAR3 ovarian
cancer cells independently of cell proliferation and without conversion to a
complete EMT phenotype. Epithelial ovarian cancer commonly metastasis to the
surrounding tissue or inside the peritoneum rather than invading blood vessels to
set distance metastasis. Our result raises the question whether ovarian cancer
primarily spread via collective migration than via single cell invasion.

PMCID: PMC4180856
PMID: 25278811  [PubMed]


324. Mol Oncol. 2015 Feb;9(2):335-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.08.016. Epub 2014 Sep
16.

SNAIL1 combines competitive displacement of ASCL2 and epigenetic mechanisms to
rapidly silence the EPHB3 tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer.

Rönsch K(1), Jägle S(1), Rose K(2), Seidl M(3), Baumgartner F(4), Freihen V(2),
Yousaf A(5), Metzger E(6), Lassmann S(7), Schüle R(6), Zeiser R(8), Michoel T(9),
Hecht A(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of
Pathology, University Medical Center, Breisacher Str. 115a, 79106 Freiburg,
Germany; Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center,
Breisacher Str. 117, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (4)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, University Medical Center, Hugstetter Str. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS), Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Albertstraße 19, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (6)Department of
Urology/Women's Hospital and Center for Clinical Research, University Medical
Center, Breisacher Str. 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological 
Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104
Freiburg, Germany; German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK) and
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany. (7)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Breisacher Str.
115a, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany;
German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK) and German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center, Hugstetter
Str. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS), Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Albertstraße 19, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; The Roslin Institute, The
University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian EH25 9RG, Scotland, UK.
(10)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University 
Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany;
BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
andreas.hecht@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de.

EPHB3 is a critical cellular guidance factor in the intestinal epithelium and an 
important tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer (CRC) whose expression is
frequently lost at the adenoma-carcinoma transition when tumor cells become
invasive. The molecular mechanisms underlying EPHB3 silencing are incompletely
understood. Here we show that EPHB3 expression is anti-correlated with inducers
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in primary tumors and CRC cells. In
vitro, SNAIL1 and SNAIL2, but not ZEB1, repress EPHB3 reporter constructs and
compete with the stem cell factor ASCL2 for binding to an E-box motif. At the
endogenous EPHB3 locus, SNAIL1 triggers the displacement of ASCL2, p300 and the
Wnt pathway effector TCF7L2 and engages corepressor complexes containing HDACs
and the histone demethylase LSD1 to collapse active chromatin structure,
resulting in rapid downregulation of EPHB3. Beyond its impact on EPHB3, SNAIL1
deregulates markers of intestinal identity and stemness and in vitro forces CRC
cells to undergo EMT with altered morphology, increased motility and
invasiveness. In xenotransplants, SNAIL1 expression abrogated tumor cell
palisading and led to focal loss of tumor encapsulation and the appearance of
areas with tumor cells displaying a migratory phenotype. These changes were
accompanied by loss of EPHB3 and CDH1 expression. Intriguingly, SNAIL1-induced
phenotypic changes of CRC cells are significantly impaired by sustained EPHB3
expression both in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, our results identify EPHB3 as a
novel target of SNAIL1 and suggest that disabling EPHB3 signaling is an important
aspect to eliminate a roadblock at the onset of EMT processes.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25277775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 2;5:e1443. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.395.

TGF-ß is an inducer of ZEB1-dependent mesenchymal transdifferentiation in
glioblastoma that is associated with tumor invasion.

Joseph JV(1), Conroy S(2), Tomar T(3), Eggens-Meijer E(4), Bhat K(5), Copray
S(4), Walenkamp AM(1), Boddeke E(4), Balasubramanyian V(4), Wagemakers M(6), den 
Dunnen WF(2), Kruyt FA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Department of
Neuroscience, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of
Neuro-surgery, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Hanzeplein 1, 9713 Groningen, The Netherlands.

Different molecular subtypes of glioblastoma (GBM) have been recently identified,
of which the mesenchymal subtype is associated with worst prognoses. Here, we
report that transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is able to induce a mesenchymal 
phenotype in GBM that involves activation of SMAD2 and ZEB1, a known
transcriptional inducer of mesenchymal transition in epithelial cancers. TGF-ß
exposure of established and newly generated GBM cell lines was associated with
morphological changes, enhanced mesenchymal marker expression, migration and
invasion in vitro and in an orthotopic mouse model. TGF-ß-induced mesenchymal
differentiation and invasive behavior was prevented by chemical inhibition of
TGF-ß signaling as well as small interfering RNA (siRNA)-dependent silencing of
ZEB1. Furthermore, TGF-ß-responding and -nonresponding GBM neurospheres were
identified in vitro. Interestingly, nonresponding cells displayed already high
levels of pSMAD2 and ZEB1 that could not be suppressed by inhibition of TGF-ß
signaling, suggesting the involvement of yet unknown mechanisms. These different 
GBM neurospheres formed invasive tumors in mice as well as revealed mesenchymal
marker expression in immunohistochemical analyses. Moreover, we also detected
distinct zones with overlapping pSMAD2, elevated ZEB1 and mesenchymal marker
expression in GBM patient material, suggestive of the induction of local,
microenvironment-dependent mesenchymal differentiation. Overall, our findings
indicate that GBM cells can acquire mesenchymal features associated with enhanced
invasive potential following stimulation by secretory cytokines, such as TGF-ß.
This property of GBM contributes to heterogeneity in this tumor type and may blur
the boundaries between the proposed transcriptional subtypes. Targeting TGF-ß or 
downstream targets like ZEB1 might be of potential benefit in reducing the
invasive phenotype of GBM in a subpopulation of patients.

PMCID: PMC4649508
PMID: 25275602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Sci Signal. 2014 Sep 30;7(345):ra91. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005304.

TGF-ß-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition proceeds through stepwise
activation of multiple feedback loops.

Zhang J(1), Tian XJ(2), Zhang H(2), Teng Y(3), Li R(4), Bai F(4), Elankumaran
S(5), Xing J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biodynamic Optical Imaging Center, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.
Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24060, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24060, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Microbiology and Epidemiology, 20 Dong-Da Street, Fengtai District, Beijing
100071, China. (4)Biodynamic Optical Imaging Center, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China. (5)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology,
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24060, USA. jxing@vt.edu
kumarans@vt.edu. (6)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24060, USA. Beijing Computational 
Science Research Center, Beijing 100084, China. jxing@vt.edu kumarans@vt.edu.

The process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an essential type of
cellular plasticity associated with a change from epithelial cells that function 
as a barrier consisting of a sheet of tightly connected cells to cells with
properties of mesenchyme that are not attached to their neighbors and are highly 
motile. This phenotypic change occurs during development and also contributes to 
pathological processes, such as cancer progression. The molecular mechanisms
controlling the switch between the fully epithelial and fully mesenchymal
phenotypes and cells that have characteristics of both (partial EMT) are
controversial, and multiple theoretical models have been proposed. To test these 
theoretical models, we systematically measured the changes in the abundance of
proteins, mRNAs, and microRNAs (miRNAs) that represent the core regulators of EMT
induced by transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) in the human breast epithelial 
cell line MCF10A at the population and single-cell levels. We provide
experimental confirmation for a model of cascading switches in phenotypes
associated with TGF-ß1-induced EMT of MCF10A cells that involves two
double-negative feedback loops: one between the transcription factor SNAIL1 and
the miR-34 family and another between the transcription factor ZEB1 and the
miR-200 family. Furthermore, our data showed that whereas the transition from
epithelial to partial EMT was reversible for MCF10A cells, the transition from
partial EMT to mesenchymal was mostly irreversible at high concentrations of
TGF-ß1.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25270257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Oct;30(10):1080-3.

[Aberrant expressions of ß-catenin and ZEB1 in bladder cancer and their
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Ning Z(1), Wu K(1), Fan J(1), Wang B(1), Lv C(1), Zhu J(1), Wang X(1), Hsieh
JT(2), He D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an 710061, China. (2)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas
75235, Texas.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expressions of ß-catenin and zinc finger E-box binding
homeobox 1 (ZEB1) in bladder cancer tissues, and analyze their correlation and
significance in bladder cancer occurrence and progression.
METHODS: The study collected 79 specimens of bladder cancer. EnVision
immunohistochemical staining was used to detect the expressions and distribution 
of ß-catenin and ZEB1 protein. Their correlation was analyzed and their
relationship with clinicopathological characteristics was investigated.
RESULTS: There was a significant heterogeneity in the expression of ß-catenin in 
bladder cancer tissues. It might be distributed in the cell membrane, cytoplasm
or nucleus. In low-grade clinical and pathological urothelial carcinoma,
ß-catenin was mainly expressed in cell membrane and cytoplasm, but in high-grade 
clinical pathological bladder cancer tissues, it was mostly located in cell
cytoplasm and nucleus. ZEB1 in bladder cancer tissues was mainly expressed in
cell nucleus, and its expression was elevated with the increased tumor
pathological grade and clinical stage. The expressions of the above two proteins 
were significantly correlated.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant expressions of ß-catenin and ZEB1 in bladder cancer tissues 
are relevant to bladder tumor differentiation and metastasis, and the two
expressions are evidently correlated. The two proteins can be simultaneously used
as candidate targets for early diagnosis and prognosis prediction.

PMID: 25270213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cell Commun Signal. 2014 Oct 1;12:62. doi: 10.1186/s12964-014-0062-x.

MiR200-upregulated Vasohibin 2 promotes the malignant transformation of tumors by
inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xue X(1,)(2), Zhang Y(3), Zhi Q(4), Tu M(5), Xu Y(6), Sun J(7), Wei J(8), Lu
Z(9), Miao Y(10), Gao W(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing
Medical University, 300# Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.
xfxue@suda.edu.cn. (2)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. xfxue@suda.edu.cn. (3)Department
of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical
University, 300# Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.
zhangye2002520@yahoo.com.cn. (4)Department of General Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. strexboy@163.com.
(5)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing
Medical University, 300# Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.
tumin1215@sina.com. (6)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300# Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029,
China. 54387095@qq.com. (7)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300# Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029,
China. sunjiefuyang@163.com. (8)Department of General Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300# Guangzhou Road,
Nanjing, 210029, China. weijishu@yahoo.com.cn. (9)Department of General Surgery, 
the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300# Guangzhou
Road, Nanjing, 210029, China. surgeonmark@hotmail.com. (10)Department of General 
Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, 300#
Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China. miaoyi@njmu.edu.cn. (11)Department of
General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University,
300# Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China. gao11@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) typically relies on tumor
transformation and angiogenesis for its malignant behavior, including growth and 
metastasis. Previously, we reported that Vasohibin2 (VASH2) is preferentially
expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumor tissues and promotes
angiogenesis. Here, we further investigated the role of VASH2 in HCC tumor
progression.
RESULTS: Bioinformatics analyses and luciferase reporter gene assays confirmed
the post-transcriptional regulation of VASH2 by miR-200a/b/c. We then used HepG2 
and Hep3B cells, two representative hepatic cancer cell lines, to examine the
role of VASH2 in tumors. VASH2 knockdown in HepG2 cells inhibited
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), but VASH2 overexpression in Hep3B cells 
promoted EMT. Western blot analyses showed that VASH2 promoted EMT through the
ZEB1/2 pathway.
CONCLUSION: VASH2 promoted invasion, reduced apoptosis and increased the
proportion of stem cells in vitro and in vivo. These results indicated that VASH2
expression in HCC cells promotes the malignant transformation of tumors by
inducing EMT.

PMCID: PMC4195883
PMID: 25269476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 30;9(9):e110067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110067.
eCollection 2014.

Down-regulation of 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D receptors inhibits proliferation,
clonogenicity and invasion of human pancreatic cancer cells.

Gurbuz N, Ashour AA, Alpay SN, Ozpolat B.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is characterized by extensive local tumor
invasion, metastasis and early systemic dissemination. The vast majority of
pancreatic cancer (PaCa) patients already have metastatic complications at the
time of diagnosis, and the death rate of this lethal type of cancer has increased
over the past decades. Thus, efforts at identifying novel molecularly targeted
therapies are priorities. Recent studies have suggested that serotonin (5-HT)
contributes to the tumor growth in a variety of cancers including prostate,
colon, bladder and liver cancer. However, there is lack of evidence about the
impact of 5-HT receptors on promoting pancreatic cancer. Having considered the
role of 5-HT-1 receptors, especially 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D subtypes in different
types of malignancies, the aim of this study was to investigate the role of
5-HT1B and 5-HT1D receptors in PaCa growth and progression and analyze their
potential as cytotoxic targets. We found that knockdown of 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D
receptors expression, using specific small interfering RNA (siRNA), induced
significant inhibition of proliferation and clonogenicity of PaCa cells. Also, it
significantly suppressed PaCa cells invasion and reduced the activity of
uPAR/MMP-2 signaling and Integrin/Src/Fak-mediated signaling, as integral tumor
cell pathways associated with invasion, migration, adhesion, and proliferation.
Moreover, targeting 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D receptors down-regulates zinc finger ZEB1
and Snail proteins, the hallmarks transcription factors regulating
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), concomitantly with up-regulating of
claudin-1 and E-Cadherin. In conclusion, our data suggests that 5-HT1B- and
5-HT1D- mediated signaling play an important role in the regulation of the
proliferative and invasive phenotype of PaCa. It also highlights the therapeutic 
potential of targeting of 5-HT1B/1D receptors in the treatment of PaCa, and opens
a new avenue for biomarkers identification, and valuable new therapeutic targets 
for managing pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4182508
PMID: 25268648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 10;453(1):124-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.082. Epub 2014 Sep 26.

EED regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition of cancer cells induced by TGF-ß.

Oktyabri D(1), Tange S(1), Terashima M(1), Ishimura A(1), Suzuki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa 920-1192, Ishikawa, Japan. (2)Division of Functional
Genomics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-1192,
Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: suzuki-t@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Histone methylation is involved in various biological and pathological processes 
including cancer development. In this study, we found that EED, a component of
Polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2) that catalyzes methylation of lysine 27 of
histone H3 (H3K27), was involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of
cancer cells induced by Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-ß). The expression
of EED was increased during TGF-ß-induced EMT and knockdown of EED inhibited
TGF-ß-induced morphological conversion of the cells associated with EMT. EED
knockdown antagonized TGF-ß-dependent expression changes of EMT-related genes
such as CDH1, ZEB1, ZEB2 and microRNA-200 (miR-200) family. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that EED was implicated in TGF-ß-induced
transcriptional repression of CDH1 and miR-200 family genes through the
regulation of histone H3 methylation and EZH2 occupancies on their regulatory
regions. Our study demonstrated a novel role of EED, which regulates PRC2
activity and histone methylation during TGF-ß-induced EMT of cancer cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25264103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Urol Oncol. 2015 Mar;33(3):110.e11-8. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

Expression profile of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers in
non-muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder: correlation with
intravesical recurrence following transurethral resection.

Liu B(1), Miyake H(2), Nishikawa M(1), Fujisawa M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Division of Urology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
Electronic address: hideakimiyake@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the expression of molecular markers involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a key process mediating the progression 
of malignant tumors, in non-muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder
(NMIUCB) to clarify the significance of these markers as predictors of
intravesical recurrence in patients treated with transurethral resection (TUR).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression levels of 13 EMT markers, including E-cadherin,
N-cadherin, ß-catenin, <U+03B3>-catenin, fibronectin, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, 
MMP-9, Slug, Snail, TWIST, vimentin, ZEB1, and ZEB2, in TUR specimens obtained
from 161 consecutive patients with NMIUCB were measured by immunohistochemical
staining.
RESULTS: Of these 13 markers, significant differences in the incidence of
intravesical recurrence were noted according to expression levels of E-cadherin, 
N-cadherin, MMP-2, MMP-9, and TWIST. Univariate analysis also identified
expression levels of E-cadherin, N-cadherin, MMP-2, MMP-9 and TWIST, in addition 
to the tumor size, pathological T category, and concomitant carcinoma in situ, as
significant predictors of intravesical recurrence-free survival. Of these
significant factors, expression levels of E-cadherin, MMP-9, and TWIST; tumor
size; and concomitant carcinoma in situ appeared to be independently associated
with intravesical recurrence-free survival on multivariate analysis. Furthermore,
there were significant differences in recurrence-free survival according to
positive numbers of these 5 independent risk factors (i.e., positive for 0 or 1
factor vs. positive for 2 factors vs. positive for 3 or more factors).
CONCLUSIONS: Consideration of expression levels of EMT-associated markers in TUR 
specimens, in addition to conventional prognostic parameters, would contribute to
the accurate prediction of intravesical recurrence following TUR for NMIUCB.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25262382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cancer. 2014 Sep 27;13:223. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-223.

Molecular profiling of circulating tumor cells links plasticity to the metastatic
process in endometrial cancer.

Alonso-Alconada L, Muinelo-Romay L, Madissoo K, Diaz-Lopez A, Krakstad C, Trovik 
J, Wik E, Hapangama D, Coenegrachts L, Cano A, Gil-Moreno A, Chiva L, Cueva J,
Vieito M, Ortega E, Mariscal J, Colas E, Castellvi J, Cusido M, Dolcet X, Nijman 
HW, Bosse T, Green JA, Romano A, Reventos J, Lopez-Lopez R, Salvesen HB, Amant F,
Matias-Guiu X, Moreno-Bueno G, Abal M(1); ENITEC Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medical Oncology; Health Research Institute of Santiago (IDIS), 
SERGAS, Trav, Choupana s/n 15706, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
miguel.abal.posada@sergas.es.

BACKGROUND: About 20% of patients diagnosed with endometrial cancer (EC) are
considered high-risk with unfavorable prognosis. In the framework of the European
Network for Individualized Treatment in EC (ENITEC), we investigated the presence
and phenotypic features of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC) in high-risk EC
patients.
METHODS: CTC isolation was carried out in peripheral blood samples from 34
patients, ranging from Grade 3 Stage IB to Stage IV carcinomas and recurrences,
and 27 healthy controls using two methodologies. Samples were subjected to
EpCAM-based immunoisolation using the CELLection Epithelial Enrich kit
(Invitrogen, Dynal) followed by RTqPCR analysis. The phenotypic determinants of
endometrial CTC in terms of pathogenesis, hormone receptor pathways, stem cell
markers and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) drivers were asked.
Kruskal-Wallis analysis followed by Dunn's post-test was used for comparisons
between groups. Statistical significance was set at p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05.
RESULTS: EpCAM-based immunoisolation positively detected CTC in high-risk
endometrial cancer patients. CTC characterization indicated a remarkable
plasticity phenotype defined by the expression of the EMT markers ETV5, NOTCH1,
SNAI1, TGFB1, ZEB1 and ZEB2. In addition, the expression of ALDH and CD44 pointed
to an association with stemness, while the expression of CTNNB1, STS, GDF15,
RELA, RUNX1, BRAF and PIK3CA suggested potential therapeutic targets. We further 
recapitulated the EMT phenotype found in endometrial CTC through the
up-regulation of ETV5 in an EC cell line, and validated in an animal model of
systemic dissemination the propensity of these CTC in the accomplishment of
metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results associate the presence of CTC with high-risk EC.
Gene-expression profiling characterized a CTC-plasticity phenotype with stemness 
and EMT features. We finally recapitulated this CTC-phenotype by over-expressing 
ETV5 in the EC cell line Hec1A and demonstrated an advantage in the promotion of 
metastasis in an in vivo mouse model of CTC dissemination and homing.

PMCID: PMC4190574
PMID: 25261936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31433-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.593004. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

MicroRNA-141 and microRNA-146b-5p inhibit the prometastatic mesenchymal
characteristics through the RNA-binding protein AUF1 targeting the transcription 
factor ZEB1 and the protein kinase AKT.

Al-Khalaf HH(1), Aboussekhra A(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Oncology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre, MBC 03, P.O. Box 3354, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia and the Joint 
Center for Genomics Research, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (2)From the Department of Molecular Oncology, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, MBC 03, P.O. Box 3354, Riyadh
11211, Saudi Arabia and aboussekhra@kfshrc.edu.sa.

miR-141 and miR-146b-5p are two important tumor suppressor microRNAs, which
control several cancer-related genes and processes. In the present report, we
have shown that these microRNAs bind specific sites at the 3'-untranslated region
(UTR) of the mRNA-binding protein AUF1, leading to its down-regulation. This
inverse correlation between the levels of these microRNAs and AUF1 has been
identified in various osteosarcoma cell lines. Additionally, we present clear
evidence that AUF1 promotes mesenchymal features in osteosarcoma cells and that
miR-141 and miR-146b-5p suppress this prometastatic process through AUF1
repression. Indeed, both microRNAs suppressed the invasion/migration and
proliferation abilities of osteosarcoma cells through inhibiting the AKT protein 
kinase in an AUF1-dependent manner. We have also shown that AUF1 binds to and
stabilizes the mRNA of the AKT activator phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1
(PDK1). Furthermore, miR-141 and miR-146b-5p positively regulate the epithelial
markers (E-cadherin and Epcam) and repress the mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin,
Vimentin, Twist2, and ZEB1). These effects were mediated via the repression of
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal inducer ZEB1 through targeting AUF1, which binds
the 3'-UTR of the ZEB1 mRNA and reduces its turnover. These results indicate that
at least some tumor suppressor functions of miR-141 and miR-146b-5p are mediated 
through the repression of the oncogenic potentials of AUF1. Therefore, these
3'-UTR-directed post-transcriptional gene expression regulators constitute
promising new targets for diagnostic and/or therapeutic interventions.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4223342
PMID: 25261470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 3;588(21):3998-4007. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.017. Epub
2014 Sep 23.

Amphiregulin induces human ovarian cancer cell invasion by down-regulating
E-cadherin expression.

So WK(1), Fan Q(1), Lau MT(1), Qiu X(1), Cheng JC(1), Leung PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Child & Family Research Institute,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Child & Family Research Institute,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.
Electronic address: peter.leung@ubc.ca.

Aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation is associated with
ovarian cancer progression. In this study, we report that the EGFR ligand
amphiregulin (AREG) stimulates cell invasion and down-regulates E-cadherin
expression in two human ovarian cancer cell lines, SKOV3 and OVCAR5. In addition,
AREG increases the expression of transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin
including SNAIL, SLUG and ZEB1. siRNA targeting SNAIL or SLUG abolishes
AREG-induced cell invasion. Moreover, ERK1/2 and AKT pathways are involved in
AREG-induced E-cadherin down-regulation and cell invasion. Finally, we show that 
three EGFR ligands, AREG, epidermal growth factor (EGF) and transforming growth
factor-a (TGF-a), exhibit comparable effects in down-regulating E-cadherin and
promoting cell invasion. This study demonstrates that AREG induces ovarian cancer
cell invasion by down-regulating E-cadherin expression.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25261255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Br J Pharmacol. 2015 Feb;172(3):815-28. doi: 10.1111/bph.12947. Epub 2014 Dec 23.

Sonic hedgehog increases the skin wound-healing ability of mouse embryonic stem
cells through the microRNA 200 family.

Suh HN(1), Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul,
South Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: To use stem cell therapy effectively, it is important to 
enhance the therapeutic potential of stem cells with soluble factors. Although
sonic hedgehog (shh) is important in maintaining the stem cell, the recovery
effect of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) with shh has not yet been
elucidated. The present study investigated the effect of mESCs with shh in skin
recovery in vivo as well as the related intracellular signal pathways in vitro.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The healing effect of mESCs with shh on skin wounds was
examined in vivo in ICR mice. The involvement of Smads, the microRNA (miR)-200
family, zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox (ZEBs) and E-cadherin on shh-induced
mESC migration and self-renewal was determined in vitro.
KEY RESULTS: The mESCs with shh increased re-epithelialization and VEGF
expression in skin wounds. Shh-treated mESCs increased both secreted and
intracellular levels of VEGF. Shh induced dephosphorylation of glycogen synthase 
kinase 3ß through the Smoothened receptor and increased the phosphorylation of
Smad1 and Smad2/3 in mESCs. Shh-induced decrease of the mmu-miR-141, -200c,
-200a, -200b and -429 expression levels was significantly reversed by Smad4
siRNA. Shh increased nuclear expression of ZEB1/ZEB2 and decreased E-cadherin
expression while increasing cell migration and skin wound healing. Both these
effects were reversed by mmu-miR-141 and -200b mimics.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Mouse ESCs accelerated skin wound healing by shh
through down-regulating E-cadherin, an effect dependent on mmu-miR-141 and -200b.
Our data provides evidence for the effectiveness of shh in stem cell-based
therapy in vivo.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4301691
PMID: 25257936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Cell Physiol. 2015 May;230(5):1042-53. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24832.

LIGHT is a crucial mediator of airway remodeling.

Hung JY(1), Chiang SR, Tsai MJ, Tsai YM, Chong IW, Shieh JM, Hsu YL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Chronic inflammatory airway diseases like asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease are major health problems globally. Airway epithelial cells
play important role in airway remodeling, which is a critical process in the
pathogenesis of diseases. This study aimed to demonstrate that LIGHT, an
inflammatory factor secreted by T cells after allergen exposure, is responsible
for promoting airway remodeling. LIGHT increased primary human bronchial
epithelial cells (HBECs) undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
expressing MMP-9. The induction of EMT was associated with increased NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and p300/NF-<U+03BA>B association. The interaction of NF-<U+03BA>B with p300
facilitated NF-<U+03BA>B acetylation, which in turn, was bound to the promoter of ZEB1, 
resulting in E-cadherin downregulation. LIGHT also stimulated HBECs to produce
numerous cytokines/chemokines that could worsen airway inflammation. Furthermore,
LIGHT enhanced HBECs to secrete activin A, which increased bronchial smooth
muscle cell (BSMC) migration. In contrast, depletion of activin A decreased such 
migration. The findings suggest a new molecular determinant of LIGHT-mediated
pathogenic changes in HBECs and that the LIGHT-related vicious cycle involving
HBECs and BSMCs may be a potential target for the treatment of chronic
inflammation airway diseases with airway remodeling.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25251281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):8893-905.

MUC1-C confers EMT and KRAS independence in mutant KRAS lung cancer cells.

Kharbanda A(1), Rajabi H(1), Jin C(1), Alam M(1), Wong KK(1), Kufe D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.

Non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) that harbor an oncogenic KRAS mutation are
often associated with resistance to targeted therapies. The MUC1-C transmembrane 
protein is aberrantly overexpressed in NSCLCs and confers a poor outcome;
however, the functional role for MUC1-C in mutant KRAS NSCLC cells has remained
unclear. The present studies demonstrate that silencing MUC1-C in A549/KRAS(G12S)
and H460/KRAS(Q61H) NSCLC cells is associated with downregulation of AKT
signaling and inhibition of growth. Overexpression of a MUC1-C(CQC<U+2192>AQA) mutant,
which inhibits MUC1-C homodimerization and function, suppressed both AKT and MEK 
activation. Moreover, treatment with GO-203, an inhibitor of MUC1-C
homodimerization, blocked AKT and MEK signaling and decreased cell survival. The 
results further demonstrate that targeting MUC1-C suppresses expression of the
ZEB1 transcriptional repressor by an AKT-mediated mechanism, and in turn induces 
miR-200c. In concert with these effects on the ZEB1/miR-200c regulatory loop,
targeting MUC1-C was associated with reversal of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and inhibition of self-renewal capacity. Loss of MUC1-C function
also attenuated KRAS independence and inhibited growth of KRAS mutant NSCLC cells
as tumors in mice. These findings support a model in which targeting MUC1-C
inhibits mutant KRAS signaling in NSCLC cells and thereby reverses the EMT
phenotype and decreases self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC4253405
PMID: 25245423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 15;9(9):e107247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107247.
eCollection 2014.

CD166/ALCAM expression is characteristic of tumorigenicity and invasive and
migratory activities of pancreatic cancer cells.

Fujiwara K(1), Ohuchida K(1), Sada M(1), Horioka K(1), Ulrich CD 3rd(1), Shindo
K(2), Ohtsuka T(1), Takahata S(1), Mizumoto K(3), Oda Y(4), Tanaka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Oncology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Surgery and Oncology,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan;
Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan; Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Surgery and Oncology,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan; Kyushu
University Hospital Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Department of Anatomic
Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: CD166, also known as activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule
(ALCAM), is expressed by various cells in several tissues including cancer.
However, the role of CD166 in malignant tumors is controversial, especially in
pancreatic cancer. This study aimed to clarify the role and significance of CD166
expression in pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: We performed immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry to analyze the
expression of CD166 in surgical pancreatic tissues and pancreatic cancer cell
lines. The differences between isolated CD166+ and CD166- pancreatic cancer cells
were analyzed by invasion and migration assays, and in mouse xenograft models. We
also performed quantitative RT-PCR and microarray analyses to evaluate the
expression levels of CD166 and related genes in cultured cells.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry revealed high expression of CD166 in pancreatic
cancer tissues (12.2%; 12/98) compared with that in normal pancreas controls (0%;
0/17) (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0435). Flow cytometry indicated that CD166 was expressed in
33.8-70.2% of cells in surgical pancreatic tissues and 0-99.5% of pancreatic
cancer cell lines. Invasion and migration assays demonstrated that CD166-
pancreatic cancer cells showed stronger invasive and migratory activities than
those of CD166+ cancer cells (p<0.05). On the other hand, CD166+ Panc-1 cells
showed a significantly stronger colony formation activity than that of CD166-
Panc-1 cells (p<0.05). In vivo analysis revealed that CD166+ cells elicited
significantly greater tumor growth than that of CD166- cells (p<0.05) in both
subcutaneous and orthotopic mouse tumor models. mRNA expression of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition activator Zeb1 was over-expressed in CD166-
cells (p<0.001). Microarray analysis showed that TSPAN8 and BST2 were
over-expressed in CD166+ cells, while BMP7 and Col6A1 were over-expressed in
CD166- cells.
CONCLUSIONS: CD166+ pancreatic cancer cells are strongly tumorigenic, while
CD166- pancreatic cancer cells exhibit comparatively stronger invasive and
migratory activities. These findings suggest that CD166 expression is related to 
different functions in pancreatic cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4164537
PMID: 25221999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):6573-5.

Enteric pathogens and cellular transformation: bridging the gaps.

Umar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS.

Cancer patients in general, either due to the nature of their underlying illness 
or because of being on chemotherapeutic regimens, are at increased risk of
infection. Indeed, microbes can exploit the innate plasticity of the epithelial
cells to promote their trans-differentiation into a mesenchymal phenotype in a
process called epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This process as well
as the reverse, mesenchymal-epithelial transition, occurs repeatedly during
normal embryonic development and is recapitulated during pathologies such as
tissue fibrosis or tumor metastasis. Multiple signaling pathways including TGFß, 
Wnt and Notch working together with transcription factors such as Slug, Snail,
Twist, Zeb1 and 2 suppress E-cadherin, induce EMT and result in loss of cell-cell
adhesion, increased tumor progression and migration. In addition, in
approximately 20% of all cases, microbial organisms including pathobionts of the 
commensal microbiota, have been implicated in inflammatory processes that promote
tumor growth. Thus, the dynamic process of EMT serves to enhance tumor
progression and is also involved in the generation of cancer stem cells (CSCs)
across multiple organ systems including colon cancer. Suffice to say, EMT and CSC
molecular pathways activated by pathogens, may represent a unique therapeutic
alternative to conventional anti-neoplastic strategy to mitigate early stage
metastasis and/or frank malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4196145
PMID: 25216513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Genes (Basel). 2014 Sep 11;5(3):804-20. doi: 10.3390/genes5030804.

Functional Role of the microRNA-200 Family in Breast Morphogenesis and Neoplasia.

Hilmarsdottir B(1), Briem E(2), Bergthorsson JT(3), Magnusson MK(4), Gudjonsson
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Unit, Department of Medical Faculty, Biomedical Center,
University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegi 16, 101 Reykjavík, Iceland. byh1@hi.is.
(2)Stem Cell Research Unit, Department of Medical Faculty, Biomedical Center,
University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegi 16, 101 Reykjavík, Iceland. eib13@hi.is.
(3)Stem Cell Research Unit, Department of Medical Faculty, Biomedical Center,
University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegi 16, 101 Reykjavík, Iceland.
jon.bergthorsson@gmail.com. (4)Stem Cell Research Unit, Department of Medical
Faculty, Biomedical Center, University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegi 16, 101
Reykjavík, Iceland. magnuskm@hi.is. (5)Stem Cell Research Unit, Department of
Medical Faculty, Biomedical Center, University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegi 16, 101
Reykjavík, Iceland. tgudjons@hi.is.

Branching epithelial morphogenesis is closely linked to epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a process important in normal development and cancer
progression. The miR-200 family regulates epithelial morphogenesis and EMT
through a negative feedback loop with the ZEB1 and ZEB2 transcription factors.
miR-200 inhibits expression of ZEB1/2 mRNA, which in turn can down-regulate the
miR-200 family that further results in down-regulation of E-cadherin and
induction of a mesenchymal phenotype. Recent studies show that the expression of 
miR-200 genes is high during late pregnancy and lactation, thereby indicating
that these miRs are important for breast epithelial morphogenesis and
differentiation. miR-200 genes have been studied intensively in relation to
breast cancer progression and metastasis, where it has been shown that miR-200
members are down-regulated in basal-like breast cancer where the EMT phenotype is
prominent. There is growing evidence that the miR-200 family is up-regulated in
distal breast metastasis indicating that these miRs are important for
colonization of metastatic breast cancer cells through induction of mesenchymal
to epithelial transition. The dual role of miR-200 in primary and metastatic
breast cancer is of interest for future therapeutic interventions, making it
important to understand its role and interacting partners in more detail.

PMCID: PMC4198932
PMID: 25216122  [PubMed]


341. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Nov;18(11):2235-51. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12361. Epub 2014 Sep
12.

Elongation factor-2 kinase regulates TG2/ß1 integrin/Src/uPAR pathway and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition mediating pancreatic cancer cells invasion.

Ashour AA(1), Gurbuz N, Alpay SN, Abdel-Aziz AA, Mansour AM, Huo L, Ozpolat B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas, M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is one of the lethal cancers with extensive
local tumour invasion, metastasis, early systemic dissemination and poorest
prognosis. Thus, understanding the mechanisms regulating invasion/metastasis and 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is the key for developing effective
therapeutic strategies for pancreatic cancer (PaCa). Eukaryotic elongation
factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K) is an atypical kinase that we found to be highly
up-regulated in PaCa cells. However, its role in PaCa invasion/progression
remains unknown. Here, we investigated the role of eEF-2K in cellular invasion,
and we found that down-regulation of eEF-2K, by siRNA or rottlerin, displays
impairment of PaCa cells invasion/migration, with significant decreases in the
expression of tissue transglutaminase (TG2), the multifunctional enzyme
implicated in regulation of cell attachment, motility and survival. These events 
were associated with reductions in ß1 integrin/uPAR/MMP-2 expressions as well as 
decrease in Src activity. Furthermore, inhibition of eEF-2K/TG2 axis suppresses
the EMT, as demonstrated by the modulation of the zinc finger transcription
factors, ZEB1/Snail, and the tight junction proteins, claudins. Importantly,
while eEF-2K silencing recapitulates the rottlerin-induced inhibition of invasion
and correlated events, eEF-2K overexpression, by lentivirus-based expression
system, suppresses such rottlerin effects and potentiates PaCa cells
invasion/migration capability. Collectively, our results show, for the first
time, that eEF-2K is involved in regulation of the invasive phenotype of PaCa
cells through promoting a new signalling pathway, which is mediated by TG2/ß1
integrin/Src/uPAR/MMP-2, and the induction of EMT biomarkers which enhance cancer
cell motility and metastatic potential. Thus, eEF-2K could represent a novel
potential therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4224557
PMID: 25215932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Int J Oncol. 2014 Dec;45(6):2430-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2644. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

P-Akt/miR-200 signaling regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration
and invasion in circulating gastric tumor cells.

Yuan D(1), Xia H(2), Zhang Y(2), Chen L(2), Leng W(1), Chen T(3), Chen Q(1), Tang
Q(2), Mo X(3), Liu M(1), Bi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, P.R. China. (2)Laboratory of Signal Transduction and Molecular
Target Therapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, P.R.
China. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, P.R. China.

Both circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
play an important role in invasion, migration and chemoresistant in tumor
development. This study aimed to detect whether EMT occurred in human gastric
CTCs and to explore the mechanism of EMT in human gastric CTCs. We analysed
epithelial markers (pan-CK, E-cadherin), mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin,
vimentin) EMT related miR-200s, and Akt in gastric CTCs. The impact of miR-200s
on EMT, migration and invasion in CTCs was tested. We found that epithelial
markers pan-CK, E-cadherin were decreased, and mesenchymal markers N-cadherin,
vimentin were overexpressed in gastric CTCs. Expression of EMT related
transcriptors, snail1, zeb1, twist1, were reversely correlated with miR-200s, and
were positively correlated with phospho-Akt. Upregulated of miR-200s
downregulated twist1 and zeb1 mRNA expression, and resulted in the supression of 
EMT, and impaired migration and invasion in gastric CTCs. Inhibition of p-Akt led
to upregulation of miR-200s. In conclusion, gastric CTCs exhibited remarkable EMT
process, and p-Akt/miR-200s signaling regulates EMT, migration and invasion in
gastric CTCs.

PMID: 25200917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:921564. doi: 10.1155/2014/921564. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

Transcription regulation of E-cadherin by zinc finger E-box binding homeobox
proteins in solid tumors.

Wong TS(1), Gao W(1), Chan JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Downregulation of E-cadherin in solid tumors with regional migration and
systematic metastasis is well recognized. In view of its significance in
tumorigenesis and solid cancer progression, studies on the regulatory mechanisms 
are important for the development of target treatment and prediction of clinical 
behavior for cancer patients. The vertebrate zinc finger E-box binding homeobox
(ZEB) protein family comprises 2 major members: ZEB1 and ZEB2. Both contain the
motif for specific binding to multiple enhancer boxes (E-boxes) located within
the short-range transcription regulatory regions of the E-cadherin gene. Binding 
of ZEB1 and ZEB2 to the spaced E-cadherin E-boxes has been implicated in the
regulation of E-cadherin expression in multiple human cancers. The widespread
functions of ZEB proteins in human malignancies indicate their significance.
Given the significance of E-cadherin in the solid tumors, a deeper understanding 
of the functional role of ZEB proteins in solid tumors could provide insights in 
the design of target therapy against the migratory nature of solid cancers.

PMCID: PMC4147210
PMID: 25197668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Sep 4;55(10):6159-66. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-15247.

Functional impact of ZEB1 mutations associated with posterior polymorphous and
Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophies.

Chung DW(1), Frausto RF(1), Ann LB(1), Jang MS(1), Aldave AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at University
of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States.

PURPOSE: To assess the impact of zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) gene
mutations associated with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 3 (PPCD3) and 
Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD).
METHODS: Thirteen of the 27 previously reported ZEB1 truncating mutations
associated with PPCD3 and the six previously reported ZEB1 missense mutations
associated with FECD were generated and transiently transfected into a corneal
endothelial cell line. Protein abundance was determined by immunoblotting, while 
intracellular localization was determined by fluorescence confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: Three of the 13 ZEB1 truncated mutants, and none of the missense
mutants, showed significant decrease in mutant ZEB1 protein levels. Predominant
nuclear localization was observed for truncated ZEB1 mutant proteins with a
predicted molecular weight of less than 92 kilodaltons. The two largest mutant
proteins that lacked a putative nuclear localization signal (NLS),
p.(Ser638Cysfs*5) and p.(Gln884Argfs*37), primarily localized to the cytoplasm,
while the NLS-containing mutant proteins, p.(Glu997Alafs*7) and
p.(Glu1039Glyfs*6), primarily localized to the nucleus. All the missense ZEB1
mutant proteins were exclusively present in the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: ZEB1 truncating mutations result in a significant decrease and/or
impaired nuclear localization of the encoded protein, indicating that ZEB1
haploinsufficiency in PPCD3 may result from decreased protein production and/or
impaired cellular localization. Conversely, as the reported ZEB1 missense
mutations do not significantly impact protein abundance or nuclear localization, 
the effect of these mutations on ZEB1 function and their relationship to FECD, if
any, remain to be elucidated.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4184387
PMID: 25190660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;74(17):4574-87. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3367.

Toward decoding the principles of cancer metastasis circuits.

Lu M(1), Jolly MK(2), Onuchic J(3), Ben-Jacob E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Departments of. (2)Center for
Theoretical Biological Physics, Departments of Bioengineering. (3)Center for
Theoretical Biological Physics, Departments of Physics and Astronomy, Chemistry, 
and Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas;
eshel@rice.edu jonuchic@rice.edu. (4)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics,
Departments of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas;
School of Physics and Astronomy; and The Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel eshel@rice.edu jonuchic@rice.edu.

Understanding epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) during cancer metastasis
remains a major challenge in modern biology. Recent observations of cell behavior
together with progress in mapping the underlying regulatory genetic networks led 
to new understandings of carcinoma metastasis. It is now established that the
genetic network that regulates the EMT also enables an epithelial-mesenchymal
hybrid phenotype. These hybrid cells possess mixed carcinoma epithelial and
mesenchymal characteristics that enable specialized capabilities such as
collective cell migration. On the gene network perspective, a four-component
decision unit composed of two highly interconnected chimeric modules--the
miR34/SNAIL and the miR200/ZEB mutual-inhibition feedback circuits--regulates the
coexistence of and transitions between the different phenotypes. Here, we present
a new tractable theoretical framework to model and decode the underlying
principles governing the operation of the regulatory unit. Our approach connects 
the knowledge about intracellular pathways with observations of cellular behavior
and advances toward understanding the logic of cancer decision-making. We found
that the miR34/SNAIL module acts as an integrator while the miR200/ZEB module
acts as a three-way switch. Consequently, the combined unit can give rise to
three phenotypes (stable states): (i) a high miR200 and low ZEB, or (1, 0) state;
(ii) a low miR200 and high ZEB, or (0, 1) state; and (iii) a medium miR200 and
medium ZEB, or (½, ½) state. We associate these states with the epithelial,
mesenchymal, and hybrid phenotypes, respectively. We reflect on the consistency
between our theoretical predictions and recent observations in several types of
carcinomas and suggest new testable predictions. See all articles in this Cancer 
Research section,

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25183783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 15;136(4):E62-73. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29177. Epub 2014 Sep
12.

Zeb1 and Snail1 engage miR-200f transcriptional and epigenetic regulation during 
EMT.

Díaz-López A(1), Díaz-Martín J, Moreno-Bueno G, Cuevas EP, Santos V, Olmeda D,
Portillo F, Palacios J, Cano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM), 
IdiPAZ, RETICC, Madrid, Spain.

Cell plasticity is emerging as a key regulator of tumor progression and
metastasis. During carcinoma dissemination epithelial cells undergo epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) processes characterized by the acquisition of
migratory/invasive properties, while the reverse, mesenchymal to epithelial
transition (MET) process, is also essential for metastasis outgrowth. Different
transcription factors, called EMT-TFs, including Snail, bHLH and Zeb families are
drivers of the EMT branch of epithelial plasticity, and can be
post-transcriptionally downregulated by several miRNAs, as the miR-200 family.
The specific or redundant role of different EMT-TFs and their functional
interrelations are not fully understood. To study the interplay between different
EMT-TFs, comprehensive gain and loss-of-function studies of Snail1, Snail2 and/or
Zeb1 factors were performed in the prototypical MDCK cell model system. We here
describe that Snail1 and Zeb1 are mutually required for EMT induction while
continuous Snail1 and Snail2 expression, but not Zeb1, is needed for maintenance 
of the mesenchymal phenotype in MDCK cells. In this model system, EMT is
coordinated by Snail1 and Zeb1 through transcriptional and epigenetic
downregulation of the miR-200 family. Interestingly, Snail1 is involved in
epigenetic CpG DNA methylation of the miR-200 loci, essential to maintain the
mesenchymal phenotype. The present results thus define a novel functional
interplay between Snail and Zeb EMT-TFs in miR-200 family regulation providing a 
molecular link to their previous involvement in the generation of EMT process in 
vivo.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25178837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Oncogene. 2015 Jul;34(27):3527-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.280. Epub 2014 Sep 1.

CIP4 promotes lung adenocarcinoma metastasis and is associated with poor
prognosis.

Truesdell P(1), Ahn J(1), Chander H(1), Meens J(1), Watt K(1), Yang X(2), Craig
AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada [2] Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen's Cancer
Research Institute, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

Aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) is linked to tumor progression, metastasis and poor survival
rates. Here we report the role of Cdc42-interacting protein 4 (CIP4) in the
regulation of NSCLC cell invasiveness and tumor metastasis. CIP4 was highly
expressed in a panel of NSCLC cell lines and normal lung epithelial cell lines.
Stable knockdown (KD) of CIP4 in lung adenocarcinoma H1299 cells, expressing
wild-type EGFR, led to increased EGFR levels on the cell surface and defects in
sustained activation of Erk kinase in H1299 cells treated with EGF. CIP4
localized to leading edge projections in NSCLC cells, and CIP4 KD cells displayed
defects in EGF-induced cell motility and invasion through extracellular matrix.
This correlated with reduced expression and activity of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) in CIP4 KD cells compared with control. In xenograft 
assays, CIP4 silencing had no effect on tumor growth but resulted in significant 
defects in spontaneous metastases to the lungs from these subcutaneous tumors.
This correlated with reduced expression of the Erk target gene Zeb1 and the Zeb1 
target gene MMP-2 in CIP4 KD tumors compared with control. CIP4 also enhanced
rates of metastasis to the liver and lungs in an intrasplenic experimental
metastasis model. In human NSCLC tumor sections, CIP4 expression was elevated
greater than or equal to twofold in 43% of adenocarcinomas and 32% of squamous
carcinomas compared with adjacent normal lung tissues. Analysis of microarray
data for NSCLC patients also revealed that high CIP4 transcript levels correlated
with reduced overall survival. Together, these results identify CIP4 as a
positive regulator of NSCLC metastasis and a potential poor prognostic biomarker 
in lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 25174397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;22(4):285-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2014.04.010.

[Role of zinc finger protein 1 in rat liver fibrosis and as related to TGFb
expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Shen Y(1), Chen Y, Liu Z, Wang X, Dai C, Lin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huzhou Central Hospital, Huzhou 313000,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of zinc finger protein 1 (ZEB 1) in liver
fibrosis and in regards to expression of the tumor growth factor-beta (TGFb)
signaling factor using a rat model system.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into a normal (control) group,
liver fibrosis (model) group and a liver fibrosis + therapy (ZEB1 intervention)
group. The model group and the ZEB1 intervention group were given intraperitoneal
injections of dimethylnitrosamine (DMN) for the first 3 days of each week over a 
7-week period; starting at week 5, the ZEB 1 intervention group was started on a 
routine of every other day tail vein injections of recombinant ZEB1. During this 
7-week period, the control group was given intraperitoneal injections of 0.9%
NaC1 alone on the DMN schedule. Liver tissues were collected for pathological
examination (with hematoxylin-eosin and Masson staining) and for detection of
TGFb1 and ZEB 1 expression (by RT-PCR and western blotting). Measurement data
were compared between groups using the single-factor analysis of variance test,
followed by the least significant difference LSD test. Count data were analyzed
by Fisher's exact test.
RESULTS: The model group's liver tissues showed degeneration and necrosis, as
well as obvious fibrous septa accompanied by pseudo lobules. The ZEB 1
intervention group's liver tissues showed a significantly higher degree of
fibrosis (x²=21.63, P=0), with more coarse fiber cords. The expression of ZEB1
and TGFb1 was significantly higher in the model group than in the control group
(both P less than 0.05). However, the ZEB 1 intervention group showed the highest
levels of ZEB 1 and TGFb1 expression (vs. model group, P less than 0.05).
CONCLUSION: ZEB 1 may promote the development of liver fibrosis in rats through a
mechanism involving the TGFb/Smad signaling pathway.

PMID: 25173228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 29;9(8):e105245. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105245.
eCollection 2014.

Down-regulation of 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D receptors inhibits proliferation,
clonogenicity and invasion of human pancreatic cancer cells.

Gurbuz N(1), Ashour AA(2), Alpay SN(1), Ozpolat B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas, M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department
of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. (3)Department
of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Non-Coding RNA, The University 
of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is characterized by extensive local tumor
invasion, metastasis and early systemic dissemination. The vast majority of
pancreatic cancer (PaCa) patients already have metastatic complications at the
time of diagnosis, and the death rate of this lethal type of cancer has increased
over the past decades. Thus, efforts at identifying novel molecularly targeted
therapies are priorities. Recent studies have suggested that serotonin (5-HT)
contributes to the tumor growth in a variety of cancers including prostate,
colon, bladder and liver cancer. However, there is lack of evidence about the
impact of 5-HT receptors on promoting pancreatic cancer. Having considered the
role of 5-HT-1 receptors, especially 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D subtypes in different
types of malignancies, the aim of this study was to investigate the role of
5-HT1B and 5-HT1D receptors in PaCa growth and progression and analyze their
potential as cytotoxic targets. We found that knockdown of 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D
receptors expression, using specific small interfering RNA (siRNA), induced
significant inhibition of proliferation and clonogenicity of PaCa cells. Also, it
significantly suppressed PaCa cells invasion and reduced the activity of
uPAR/MMP-2 signaling and Integrin/Src/Fak-mediated signaling, as integral tumor
cell pathways associated with invasion, migration, adhesion, and proliferation.
Moreover, targeting 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D receptors down-regulates zinc finger ZEB1
and Snail proteins, the hallmarks transcription factors regulating
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), concomitantly with up-regulating of
claudin-1 and E-Cadherin. In conclusion, our data suggests that 5-HT1B- and
5-HT1D-mediated signaling play an important role in the regulation of the
proliferative and invasive phenotype of PaCa. It also highlights the therapeutic 
potential of targeting of 5-HT1B/1D receptors in the treatment of PaCa, and opens
a new avenue for biomarkers identification, and valuable new therapeutic targets 
for managing pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4149367
PMID: 25170871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Elife. 2014 Aug 27;3:e03346. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03346.

Identification of the transcription factor ZEB1 as a central component of the
adipogenic gene regulatory network.

Gubelmann C(1), Schwalie PC(1), Raghav SK(1), Röder E(2), Delessa T(2), Kiehlmann
E(2), Waszak SM(1), Corsinotti A(3), Udin G(1), Holcombe W(1), Rudofsky G(4),
Trono D(3), Wolfrum C(2), Deplancke B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (2)Institute of Food Nutrition and Health, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule Zürich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. (3)Global Health Institute, School
of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (4)Ärztlicher Leiter Endokrinologie, Diabetologie und Klinische
Ernährung Kantonsspital Olten, Olten, Switzerland.

Adipose tissue is a key determinant of whole body metabolism and energy
homeostasis. Unraveling the regulatory mechanisms underlying adipogenesis is
therefore highly relevant from a biomedical perspective. Our current
understanding of fat cell differentiation is centered on the transcriptional
cascades driven by the C/EBP protein family and the master regulator PPAR<U+03B3>. To
elucidate further components of the adipogenic gene regulatory network, we
performed a large-scale transcription factor (TF) screen overexpressing 734 TFs
in mouse pre-adipocytes and probed their effect on differentiation. We identified
22 novel pro-adipogenic TFs and characterized the top ranking TF, ZEB1, as being 
essential for adipogenesis both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, its expression
levels correlate with fat cell differentiation potential in humans. Genomic
profiling further revealed that this TF directly targets and controls the
expression of most early and late adipogenic regulators, identifying ZEB1 as a
central transcriptional component of fat cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4359378
PMID: 25163748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:126038. doi: 10.1155/2014/126038. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Interactions between E-cadherin and microRNA deregulation in head and neck
cancers: the potential interplay.

Wong TS(1), Gao W(1), Chan JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

E-cadherin expression in the head and neck epithelium is essential for the
morphogenesis and homeostasis of epithelial tissues. The cadherin-mediated
cell-cell contacts are required for the anchorage-dependent growth of epithelial 
cells. Further, survival and proliferation require physical tethering created by 
proper cell-cell adhesion. Otherwise, the squamous epithelial cells will undergo 
programmed cell death. Head and neck cancers can escape from anoikis and enter
into the epithelial-mesenchymal transition stages via the modulation of
E-cadherin expression with epigenetic mechanisms. At epigenetic level, gene
expression control is not dependent on the DNA sequence. In the context of
E-cadherin regulation in head and neck cancers, 2 major mechanisms including de
novo promoter hypermethylation and microRNA dysregulation are most extensively
studied. Both of them control E-cadherin expression at transcription level and
subsequently hinder the overall E-cadherin protein level in the head and neck
cancer cells. Increasing evidence suggested that microRNA mediated E-cadherin
expression in the head and neck cancers by directly/indirectly targeting the
transcription suppressors of E-cadherin, ZEB1 and ZEB2.

PMCID: PMC4138976
PMID: 25161999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;116(1):115-23. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24948.

The presence of androgen receptor elements regulates ZEB1 expression in the
absence of androgen receptor.

Mooney SM(1), Parsana P, Hernandez JR, Liu X, Verdone JE, Torga G, Harberg CA,
Pienta KJ.

Author information: 
(1)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute and Department of Urology, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 21287.

Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a transcription factor that plays 
a central role in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer cell
lines. Studies on its regulation have mostly focused on the negative 3'UTR
binding of miR200c. Interestingly, it has been previously reported that androgen 
receptor (AR) regulates ZEB1 expression in breast and prostate cancers. In order 
to validate this, various ZEB1 promoter deletions were cloned into a luciferase
reporter system to elucidate the contribution of two putative androgen response
elements (AREs). The in vivo contribution of AR was also assessed in cell lines
after R1881 treatment using qPCR with prostate specific antigen (PSA) as the
positive control. We discovered that AR upregulates the levels of expression of
ZEB1 10-fold on a luciferase promoter that only contains the distal ARE. However,
when the proximal ARE is included, no additional activation is apparent with AR
or its hormone independent variant, AR-V7. Furthermore, we demonstrate here that 
a promoter construct containing both AREs activates transcription of ZEB1 even in
the AR-null cell lines DU145 and PC3. Incubation of the AR-positive cell line,
LNCaP with R1881, failed to substantially increase the expression levels of ZEB1.
Despite the presence of AREs in the promoter region, it appears that ZEB1
expression can be induced even without AR. In addition, the region around the
distal ARE is a potent repressor in AR-null cell lines.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4717842
PMID: 25160502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:629496. doi: 10.1155/2014/629496. Epub 2014 Aug 3.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and somatic alteration in colorectal cancer
with and without peritoneal carcinomatosis.

Shelygin YA(1), Pospekhova NI(1), Shubin VP(1), Kashnikov VN(1), Frolov SA(1),
Sushkov OI(1), Achkasov SI(1), Tsukanov AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Scientific Centre of Coloproctology, 2 Salyam Adil Street, Moscow
123423, Russia.

Colorectal cancer is highly metastatic even when the tumors are small. To
disseminate, cells use a complex and multistage process known as the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, in which epithelial phenotype is transformed
into mesenchymal phenotype. The objective of this study is to describe the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in terms of gene expression profile and somatic
alterations in samples of colorectal cancer with or without peritoneal
carcinomatosis. We analyzed samples taken from 38 patients with colorectal cancer
(stages II-IV) and samples from 20 patients with colorectal cancer complicated by
peritoneal carcinomatosis. The expression of ZEB1, ZEB2, CDH1, VIM, and SNAI1 was
analyzed by real-time PCR. KRAS/BRAF mutations were mapped using sequencing.
Microsatellite instability was evaluated by fragment analysis.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition was detected in 6 out of 38 samples of
colorectal cancer (stages II-IV), 7 out of 20 tumors from patients with
peritoneal carcinomatosis, and 19 out of 20 samples taken from carcinomatous
nodules. Tumors of the mesenchymal subtype displayed high frequency of somatic
mutations, microsatellite stability, and low degree of differentiation. The
identification of epithelial-mesenchymal transition may be used as a marker of
high metastatic potential, which is particularly relevant at early stages of
tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC4137488
PMID: 25157365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 15;136(6):E508-20. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29154. Epub 2014 Aug
30.

Discoidin domain receptor 1 is a novel transcriptional target of ZEB1 in breast
epithelial cells undergoing H-Ras-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Koh M(1), Woo Y, Valiathan RR, Jung HY, Park SY, Kim YN, Kim HR, Fridman R, Moon 
A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Duksung Women's University, Seoul, Korea.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process allows carcinoma cells to 
dissociate from the primary tumor thereby facilitating tumor cell invasion and
metastasis. Ras-dependent hyperactive signaling is commonly associated with
tumorigenesis, invasion, EMT, and metastasis. However, the downstream effectors
by which Ras regulates EMT remain ill defined. In this study, we show that the
H-Ras pathway leads to mesenchymal-like phenotypic changes in human breast
epithelial cells by controlling the ZEB1/microRNA-200c axis. Moreover, H-Ras
suppresses the expression of the discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1), a collagen
receptor tyrosine kinase, via ZEB1, thus identifying ZEB1 as a novel
transcriptional repressor of DDR1. Mutation studies on the putative promoter of
the DDR1 gene revealed that bipartite Z- and E-box elements play a key role in
transcriptional repression of DDR1 in Hs578T and MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cell
lines by ZEB1. Furthermore, we found an inverse correlation between ZEB1 and DDR1
expression in various cancer cell lines and in human breast carcinoma tissues.
Consistently, overexpression of DDR1 reduced the invasive phenotype of
mesenchymal-like triple-negative breast cancer cells in 3D cultures and in vivo. 
Thus, ZEB1's role in maintenance of EMT in breast carcinoma cells is mediated in 
part by its ability to suppress DDR1 expression and consequently contribute to
the activation of the invasive phenotype. Taken together, our results unveil a
novel H-Ras/ZEB1/DDR1 network that contributes to breast cancer progression in
triple-negative breast cancers.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25155634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. BMC Genomics. 2014 Aug 24;15:709. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-709.

Uncovering molecular events associated with the chemosuppressive effects of
flaxseed: a microarray analysis of the laying hen model of ovarian cancer.

Hales KH(1), Speckman SC, Kurrey NK, Hales DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale, School of Medicine, Life Science III, (M/C 6512), 1135 Dr,,
Carbondale, Lincoln, IL 62901, USA. khales@siumed.edu.

BACKGROUND: The laying hen model of spontaneous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
is unique in that it is the only model that enables observations of early events 
in disease progression and is therefore also uniquely suited for chemoprevention 
trials. Previous studies on the effect of dietary flaxseed in laying hens have
revealed the potential for both amelioration and prevention of ovarian cancer.
The objective of this study was to assess the effect of flaxseed on genes and
pathways that are dysregulated in tumors. We have used a bioinformatics approach 
to identify these genes, followed by qPCR validation, immunohistochemical
localization, and in situ hybridization to visualize expression in normal ovaries
and tumors from animals fed a control diet or a diet containing 10% flaxseed.
RESULTS: Bioinformatic analysis of ovarian tumors in hens led to the
identification of a group of highly up-regulated genes that are involved in the
embryonic process of branching morphogenesis. Expression of these genes coincides
with expression of E-cadherin in the tumor epithelium. Levels of expression of
these genes in tumors from flax-fed animals are reduced 40-60%. E-cadherin and
miR200 are both up-regulated in tumors from control-fed hens, whereas their
expression is decreased 60-75% in tumors from flax-fed hens. This does not appear
to be due to an increase in ZEB1 as mRNA levels are increased five-fold in
tumors, with no significant difference between control-fed and flax-fed hens.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that nutritional intervention with flaxseed targets the
pathways regulating branching morphogenesis and thereby alters the progression of
ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4158050
PMID: 25150550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Tumour Biol. 2014 Dec;35(12):11977-84. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2494-8. Epub 2014 
Aug 21.

Overexpression of zinc finger E-box binding homeobox factor 1 promotes tumor
invasiveness and confers unfavorable prognosis in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Yang X(1), Wang Q, Dai W, Zhang J, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrogenterology, Huai'an First People's Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Huai'an, 223300, Jiangsu, China.

Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox factor 1 (ZEB1), as a crucial mediator of
"epithelial-mesenchymal transition," contributes to malignant progression of
various epithelial tumors. However, its involvement in human esophageal squamous 
cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. In order to investigate the expression
pattern of ZEB1 in ESCC tissues and evaluate its associations with tumor
progression and patients' prognosis, 100 pairs of formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded cancerous and adjacent noncancerous tissues from patients with 
ESCC were used to detect the expression pattern of ZEB1 by immunohistochemistry. 
Then, the association between ZEB1 expression, clinicopathological parameters,
and prognosis of ESCC was examined. We also performed migration and invasion
assays of small interfering RNA (siRNA)-targeted ZEB1-transfected cells in vitro.
As a result, expression level of ZEB1 was significantly higher in ESCC tissues
compared to that in adjacent noncancerous tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). High expression of
ZEB1 was observed in 55.00 % (55/100) of ESCCs. In addition, high ZEB1 expression
was found to be closely correlated with advanced tumor stage (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001),
positive lymph node metastasis (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001), great tumor depth (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03), and
high histologic grade (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008). Moreover, multivariate analysis showed that
the status of ZEB1 expression was an independent predictor for overall survival
in ESCC. Furthermore, knockdown of ZEB1 by transfection of siRNA-ZEB1 abrogated
the migration and invasion of ESCC cells in vitro. Taken together, our data offer
the convincing evidence that ZEB1 may play a crucial role in promoting aggressive
ESCC progression. ZEB1 may serve as an effective prognostic marker and a
potential target for therapeutic intervention of ESCC.

PMID: 25142232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Transl Med. 2014 Aug 21;12:231. doi: 10.1186/s12967-014-0231-0.

The impact of microRNA-mediated PI3K/AKT signaling on epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and cancer stemness in endometrial cancer.

Dong P(1), Konno Y, Watari H, Hosaka M, Noguchi M, Sakuragi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's Health Educational System, Hokkaido University School of
Medicine, Hokkaido University, N15, W7, Sapporo 0608638, Japan. dpx1cn@gmail.com.

Activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, a common mechanism in all subtypes of
endometrial cancers (endometrioid and non-endometrioid tumors), has important
roles in contributing to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem 
cell (CSC) features. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that
concurrently affect multiple target genes, and regulate a wide range of genes
involved in modulating EMT and CSC properties. Here we overview the recent
advances revealing the impact of miRNAs on EMT and CSC phenotypes in tumors
including endometrial cancer via regulating PI3K/AKT pathway. MiRNAs are crucial 
mediators of EMT and CSC through targeting PTEN-PI3K-AKT-mTOR axis. In
endometrial cancer cells, miRNAs can activate or attenuate EMT and CSC by
targeting PTEN and other EMT-associated genes, such as Twist1, ZEB1 and BMI-1.
More detailed studies of miRNAs will deepen our understanding of the molecular
basis underlying PI3K/AKT-induced endometrial cancer initiation and progression. 
Targeting key signaling components of PI3K/AKT pathway by restoring or inhibiting
miRNA function holds promise as a potential therapeutic approach to suppress EMT 
and CSC in endometrial cancer.

PMCID: PMC4145234
PMID: 25141911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jun 15;7(7):4095-103. eCollection 2014.

Transcription factors related to epithelial mesenchymal transition in tumor
center and margin in invasive lung adenocarcinoma.

Maeng YI(1), Kim KH(1), Kim JY(1), Lee SJ(1), Sung WJ(1), Lee CK(2), Park JB(1), 
Park KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu
Daegu, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine,
Catholic University of Daegu Daegu, Republic of Korea.

The tumor microenvironment has many roles involving tumor progression, invasion
and metastasis. The tumor cells at the tumor border loose epithelial properties
and acquire mesenchymal features. This, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) has been suggested to be an important process for tissue and lymphovascular
invasion. Pulmonary tissue samples from 15 patients with primary adenocarcinoma
were evaluated with using immunofluorescence multi-staining the EMT-associated
markers including E-cadherin and alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), and
transcription factors including E-SNAIL and SLUG, and ZEB1. The data were
analyzed in specific area, such as tumor center and tumor border. In this study
we show that the invasive adenocarcinoma differentially expressed SNAIL and SLUG,
and Zeb1 and it was associated with the loss of epithelial marker (E-cadherin)
and gaining of mesenchymal marker (a-SMA) at the invasive border of lung
carcinoma. The positive rates of SNAIL and ZEB1 were 26.7% and 0% in the tumor
center and 40% and 20% in tumor margin, respectively. In addition, the expression
of both SNAIL and ZEB1 at the border of tumor was observed in two cases (2/10).
These two cases were associated with lymph node metastasis and advanced stage.
The process of EMT has been suggested to be of prime importance for tissue and
lymphovascular invasion. The process of EMT may be activated in the tumor border 
of lung adenocarcinoma. Related transcription factors, such as SNAIL and SLUG,
and ZEB1, might be induced by paracrine effects of surrounded inflammatory cells 
and fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC4129023
PMID: 25120788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Tumour Biol. 2014 Nov;35(11):11359-66. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2434-7. Epub 2014 
Aug 15.

Molecular regulation of ovarian cancer cell invasion.

Sun N(1), Zhang Q, Xu C, Zhao Q, Ma Y, Lu X, Wang L, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Second 
Military Medical University, 415 Fengyang Road, Shanghai, 200003, China.

The molecular mechanism underlying ovarian cancer invasiveness and metastasis
remains unclear. Since significant downregulation in microRNA 200 (miRNA200)
family (miR200a, miR200b, and miR200c) has been reported in the invasive ovarian 
cancer cells, here, we used two human ovarian cancer cell lines, OVCAR3 and
SKOV3, to study the molecular basis of miR200, matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP3) 
activation, and cancer invasiveness. We found that overexpression of either
miR200 family member in OVCAR3 or SKOV3 cells significantly inhibited production 
and secretion of MMP3 and cancer invasiveness. Moreover, forced MMP3 expression
abolished miR200-induced inhibition of ovarian cancer cell invasiveness,
suggesting that miR200 family inhibited ovarian cell invasiveness via
downregulating MMP3. Furthermore, ZEB1, a major target of miR200, was inhibited
by miR200 overexpression. Forced ZEB1 expression abolished miR200-induced
inhibition of ovarian cancer cell invasiveness, suggesting that ZEB1 is a direct 
target of miR200 for inhibiting ovarian cell invasiveness. Finally,
phosphorylated SMAD3 (pSMAD3), a major partner of ZEB1, was efficiently inhibited
by miR200, which could be restored by forced expression of ZEB1, but not by
forced expression of MMP3, suggesting that ZEB1/pSMAD3 is signaling cascade
upstream of MMP3 in this model. Taken together, our data suggest that miR200
family inhibited ovarian cancer cell invasiveness and metastasis by
downregulating MMP3, possibly through ZEB1/pSMAD3.

PMID: 25119590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Oct;10(4):1999-2003. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2452. Epub 2014 Aug 
5.

Baicalein inhibits migration and invasion of gastric cancer cells through
suppression of the TGF-ß signaling pathway.

Chen F(1), Zhuang M(2), Peng J(3), Wang X(1), Huang T(4), Li S(1), Lin M(1), Lin 
H(1), Xu Y(1), Li J(1), Chen Z(1), Huang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital of Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, P.R. China. (2)College of Union Clinical Medicine, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, P.R. China. (3)Academy of Integrative 
Medicine Biomedical Research Center, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, P.R. China. (4)College of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, P.R. China.

The transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling pathway exhibits an important 
role in cancer invasion and metastasis. Excessive expression of TGF-ß activates
Smad4, leading to the upregulation of downstream metastasis-associated genes.
Thus, the inhibition of the TGF-ß/Smad4 signaling pathway may be a novel strategy
for treatment of cancer metastasis. Baicalein, a flavonoid derived from the root 
of Scutellaria baicalensis, has been reported to exert strong anti-tumor activity
towards various types of cancer. In the present study the effect of baicalein on 
migration and invasion of cancer cells was evaluated using wound-healing and
Transwell assays. In order to investigate the possible molecular mechanisms of
the anti-metastatic effects of baicalein, quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
(qPCR) and western blot analyses were performed to examine the effect on the
expression of TGF-ß, Smad4, N-cadherin, vimentin, ZEB1 and ZEB2. It was
determined that baicalein inhibited the migration and invasion of AGS cells by
suppressing the TGF-ß/Smad4 signaling pathway. In addition, baicalein treatment
reduced the expression of the metastasis-associated N-cadherin, vimentin, ZEB1
and ZEB2, downstream target genes of the TGF-ß/Smad4 signaling pathway.
Collectively, these results suggest that inhibition of the metastasis of cancer
cells via inactivation of TGF-ß/Smad4 signaling is one of the mechanisms by which
baicalein may treat cancer.

PMID: 25109410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cancer Metab. 2014 Jul 29;2:11. doi: 10.1186/2049-3002-2-11. eCollection 2014.

GLUT3 is induced during epithelial-mesenchymal transition and promotes tumor cell
proliferation in non-small cell lung cancer.

Masin M(1), Vazquez J(1), Rossi S(2), Groeneveld S(1), Samson N(1), Schwalie
PC(3), Deplancke B(3), Frawley LE(4), Gouttenoire J(5), Moradpour D(5), Oliver
TG(6), Meylan E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, School of Life Sciences,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland.
(2)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne
1015, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland. (4)Koch Institute
for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, University of Lausanne, Lausanne 1011,
Switzerland. (6)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
84112, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in glucose metabolism and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) constitute two important characteristics of carcinoma
progression toward invasive cancer. Despite an extensive characterization of each
of them separately, the links between EMT and glucose metabolism of tumor cells
remain elusive. Here we show that the neuronal glucose transporter GLUT3
contributes to glucose uptake and proliferation of lung tumor cells that have
undergone an EMT.
RESULTS: Using a panel of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, we
demonstrate that GLUT3 is strongly expressed in mesenchymal, but not epithelial
cells, a finding corroborated in hepatoma cells. Furthermore, we identify that
ZEB1 binds to the GLUT3 gene to activate transcription. Importantly, inhibiting
GLUT3 expression reduces glucose import and the proliferation of mesenchymal lung
tumor cells, whereas ectopic expression in epithelial cells sustains
proliferation in low glucose. Using a large microarray data collection of human
NSCLCs, we determine that GLUT3 expression correlates with EMT markers and is
prognostic of poor overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our results reveal that GLUT3 is a transcriptional
target of ZEB1 and that this glucose transporter plays an important role in lung 
cancer, when tumor cells loose their epithelial characteristics to become more
invasive. Moreover, these findings emphasize the development of GLUT3 inhibitory 
drugs as a targeted therapy for the treatment of patients with poorly
differentiated tumors.

PMCID: PMC4122054
PMID: 25097756  [PubMed]


362. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 4;9(8):e103965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103965. eCollection
2014.

MicroRNA-150 predicts a favorable prognosis in patients with epithelial ovarian
cancer, and inhibits cell invasion and metastasis by suppressing transcriptional 
repressor ZEB1.

Jin M(1), Yang Z(1), Ye W(1), Xu H(1), Hua X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

MicroRNA (miR)-150 has been reported to be dramatically downregulated in human
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) tissues and patients' serum compared to normal
controls. This study aimed to investigate clinical significance and molecular
mechanisms of miR-150 in EOC. In the current study, quantitative real-time PCR
analysis showed that miR-150 was significantly downregulated in human EOC tissues
compared to normal tissue samples. Then, we demonstrated the significant
associations of miR-150 downregulation with aggressive clinicopathological
features of EOC patients, including high clinical stage and pathological grade,
and shorter overall and progression-free survivals. More importantly, the
multivariate analysis identified miR-150 expression as an independent prognostic 
biomarker in EOC. After that, luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that Zinc
Finger E-Box Binding Homeobox 1 (ZEB1), a crucial regulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), was a direct target of miR-150 in EOC
cells. Moreover, we found that the ectopic expression of miR-150 could
efficiently inhibit cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis by suppressing
the expression of ZEB1. Furthermore, we also observed a significantly negative
correlation between miR-150 and ZEB1 mRNA expression in EOC tissues (rs<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.45, 
P<0.001). In conclusion, these findings offer the convincing evidence that
aberrant expression of miR-150 may play a role in tumor progression and prognosis
in patients with EOC. Moreover, our data reveal that miR-150 may function as a
tumor suppressor and modulate EOC cell proliferation, and invasion by directly
and negatively regulating ZEB1, implying the re-expression of miR-150 might be a 
potential therapeutic strategy for EOC.

PMCID: PMC4121232
PMID: 25090005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;16(9):864-75. doi: 10.1038/ncb3013. Epub 2014 Aug 3.

ATM-mediated stabilization of ZEB1 promotes DNA damage response and
radioresistance through CHK1.

Zhang P(1), Wei Y(2), Wang L(1), Debeb BG(3), Yuan Y(4), Zhang J(1), Yuan J(1),
Wang M(1), Chen D(1), Sun Y(2), Woodward WA(3), Liu Y(5), Dean DC(5), Liang H(4),
Hu Y(6), Ang KK(3), Hung MC(7), Chen J(8), Ma L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)Molecular Targets Program, James
Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center,
Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA. (6)Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist
Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (7)1] Department of Molecular and 
Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for Molecular Medicine and Graduate Institute of
Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung 402, Taiwan [3] Cancer Biology
Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (8)1] Department of
Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Cancer Biology Program, Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with characteristics of
breast cancer stem cells, including chemoresistance and radioresistance. However,
it is unclear whether EMT itself or specific EMT regulators play causal roles in 
these properties. Here we identify an EMT-inducing transcription factor, zinc
finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), as a regulator of radiosensitivity and
DNA damage response. Radioresistant subpopulations of breast cancer cells derived
from ionizing radiation exhibit hyperactivation of the kinase ATM and
upregulation of ZEB1, and the latter promotes tumour cell radioresistance in
vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, ATM phosphorylates and stabilizes ZEB1 in
response to DNA damage, ZEB1 in turn directly interacts with USP7 and enhances
its ability to deubiquitylate and stabilize CHK1, thereby promoting homologous
recombination-dependent DNA repair and resistance to radiation. These findings
identify ZEB1 as an ATM substrate linking ATM to CHK1 and the mechanism
underlying the association between EMT and radioresistance.

PMCID: PMC4150825
PMID: 25086746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Pathol. 2014 Nov;234(3):410-22. doi: 10.1002/path.4416.

Cancer cell invasion and EMT marker expression: a three-dimensional study of the 
human cancer-host interface.

Bronsert P(1), Enderle-Ammour K, Bader M, Timme S, Kuehs M, Csanadi A, Kayser G, 
Kohler I, Bausch D, Hoeppner J, Hopt UT, Keck T, Stickeler E, Passlick B,
Schilling O, Reiss CP, Vashist Y, Brabletz T, Berger J, Lotz J, Olesch J, Werner 
M, Wellner UF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre, Freiburg, Germany;
Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Freiburg, Germany.

Cancer cell invasion takes place at the cancer-host interface and is a
prerequisite for distant metastasis. The relationships between current biological
and clinical concepts such as cell migration modes, tumour budding and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) remains unclear in several aspects,
especially for the 'real' situation in human cancer. We developed a novel method 
that provides exact three-dimensional (3D) information on both microscopic
morphology and gene expression, over a virtually unlimited spatial range, by
reconstruction from serial immunostained tissue slices. Quantitative 3D
assessment of tumour budding at the cancer-host interface in human pancreatic,
colorectal, lung and breast adenocarcinoma suggests collective cell migration as 
the mechanism of cancer cell invasion, while single cancer cell migration seems
to be virtually absent. Budding tumour cells display a shift towards spindle-like
as well as a rounded morphology. This is associated with decreased E-cadherin
staining intensity and a shift from membranous to cytoplasmic staining, as well
as increased nuclear ZEB1 expression.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25081610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Cancer Gene Ther. 2014 Sep;21(9):364-72. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2014.39. Epub 2014 Aug 
1.

Notch3 is important for TGF-ß-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
non-small cell lung cancer bone metastasis by regulating ZEB-1.

Liu L(1), Chen X(2), Wang Y(1), Qu Z(1), Lu Q(3), Zhao J(3), Yan X(3), Zhang
H(1), Zhou Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, China. (2)Health and Rehabilitation Department, Xi'an Children's Hospital,
Shaanxi, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

The Notch signaling pathway plays an important role in the bone metastasis
microenvironment. Although recent evidence suggests that Notch signaling
contributes to bone metastasis in breast and prostate cancer, its role and
possible mechanisms in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) bone metastasis are not
yet clear. Here, we show that Notch3 is overexpressed in NSCLC bone metastases.
The inhibition of Notch3 by small interfering RNA transfection decreased the
invasion ability of NSCLC cells and transforming growth factor (TGF)-induced
interleukin (IL)-6 and parathyroid hormone-related protein (pTHrP) expression in 
vitro. We also observed that Notch3 induced a strong morphological
transformation, promoting the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Western
blotting and real-time polymerase chain reaction assays revealed that the forced 
overexpression of Notch3 induced the expression and activity of ZEB-1 and
subsequent suppression of E-cadherin and upregulation of fibronectin,
contributing to EMT and invasion. Western blotting and immunofluorescence assays 
showed that RNA interference-mediated ZEB-1 suppression blocked Notch-induced
EMT-like transformation and subsequently reversed the observed effects on
E-cadherin and downregulated fibronectin. A luciferase reporter system showed
that Notch-induced ZEB-1 requires a functional binding site in the ZEB-1
promoter. In vitro invasion assays showed that the inhibition of ZEB-1 can
decrease Notch3-promoted invasion and the expression of pTHrP and IL-6. Our
results demonstrated that Notch upregulates ZEB-1, which contributes to
TGF-ß-induced EMT-like transformation and bone metastasis in NSCLC.

PMID: 25080992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Oncol Rep. 2014 Oct;32(4):1451-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3354. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

USP22 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition via the FAK pathway in
pancreatic cancer cells.

Ning Z(1), Wang A(2), Liang J(1), Xie Y(3), Liu J(2), Yan Q(3), Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, Liaoning, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalian Medical University,
Liaoning Provincial Core Laboratory of Glycobiology and Glycoengineering, Dalian,
Liaoning, P.R. China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to the occurrence and
development of tumors, particularly to the promotion of tumor invasion and
metastasis. As a newly discovered ubiquitin hydrolase family member, USP22 plays 
a key role in the malignant transformation of tumors and the regulation of the
cell cycle. However, recent studies on USP22 have primarily focused on its role
in cell cycle regulation, and the potential mechanism underlying the promotion of
tumor invasion and metastasis by abnormal USP22 expression has not been reported.
Our studies revealed that the overexpression of USP22 in PANC-1 cells promoted
Ezrin redistribution and phosphorylation and cytoskeletal remodeling, upregulated
expression of the transcription factors Snail and ZEB1 to promote EMT, and
increased cellular invasion and migration. In contrast, blockade of USP22
expression resulted in the opposite effects. In addition, the focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) signaling pathway was shown to play a key role in the process of EMT
induction in PANC-1 cells by USP22. Thus, the present study suggests that USP22
acts as a regulatory protein for EMT in pancreatic cancer, which may provide a
new approach for the targeted therapy of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 25070659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S750-7. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3946-5. Epub 
2014 Jul 29.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm (IPMN) is associated with high tumor grade and adverse outcomes.

Lahat G(1), Lubezky N, Loewenstein S, Nizri E, Gan S, Pasmanik-Chor M, Hayman L, 
Barazowsky E, Ben-Haim M, Klausner JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel,
guyla@tasmc.health.gov.il.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is generally associated
with increased tumor aggressiveness and poor prognosis. We evaluated EMT
characteristics in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) tumor specimens
and their potential role as biomarkers for malignancy, metastasis, and adverse
patient outcomes.
METHODS: IPMN surgical specimens were identified and reviewed by two
gastrointestinal pathologists. Immunohistochemical analysis of E-cadherin,
vimentin, and ZEB-1 was performed. Samples were linked to clinicopathologic and
outcome data for these patients. Western blot test was used to evaluate ZEB-1
expression in IPMN samples; 846 human miRNAs were profiled, and EMT-related
differentially expressed miRNAs were validated using quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Fifty-eight IPMN specimens and five normal pancreatic tissue samples
were immunohistochemically stained and scored. E-cadherin expression was
significantly lower in malignant versus low-grade IPMN (p < 0.05). Vimentin
expression was increased in malignant IPMN tumor samples (p < 0.05). EMT was
associated with increased lymph node metastasis and decreased survival of
malignant IPMN patients (p < 0.05). ZEB-1, an imperative EMT regulator, was
exclusively expressed by malignant IPMN tumors. miRNA hierarchical clustering
demonstrated grouping of two main IPMN subgroups: low-grade IPMN versus
high-grade IPMN and carcinoma. Twenty-four miRNAs were differentially expressed
(14 up-regulated, 10 down-regulated). The EMT-regulatory miRNAs, miR-200c and
miR-141, were down-regulated (twofold and 1.8-fold decrease, respectively) in
malignant versus low-grade IPMN (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: EMT may play a role in IPMN tumorigenesis and metastasis. EMT
molecular deregulations could be utilized as potential novel biomarkers for the
identification of high-risk IPMN patients.

PMID: 25069861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Oncogene. 2015 May 28;34(22):2910-21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.218. Epub 2014 Jul
28.

Ga12 gep oncogene deregulation of p53-responsive microRNAs promotes
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yang YM(1), Lee WH(1), Lee CG(1), An J(2), Kim ES(3), Kim SH(4), Lee SK(5), Lee
CH(4), Dhanasekaran DN(6), Moon A(3), Hwang S(4), Lee SJ(7), Park JW(5), Kim
KM(2), Kim SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Asan
Liver Center, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Duksung Women's University, Seoul,
South Korea. (4)College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Center for Liver Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang, South Korea.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, OU Cancer Institute, The University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (7)College of Pharmacy, Gachon
University, Incheon, South Korea.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a poor prognosis owing to aggressive
phenotype. Ga12 gep oncogene product couples to G-protein-coupled receptors,
whose ligand levels are frequently increased in tumor microenvironments. Here, we
report Ga12 overexpression in human HCC and the resultant induction of
zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) as mediated by microRNA deregulation.
Ga12 expression was higher in HCC than surrounding non-tumorous tissue.
Transfection of Huh7 cell with an activated mutant of Ga12 (Ga12QL) deregulated
microRNA (miRNA or miR)-200b/a/429, -194-2/192 and -194-1/215 clusters in the
miRNome. cDNA microarray analyses disclosed the targets affected by Ga12 gene
knockout. An integrative network of miRNAs and mRNA changes enabled us to predict
ZEB1 as a key molecule governed by Ga12. Decreases of miR-200a/b, -192 and -215
by Ga12 caused ZEB1 induction. The ability of Ga12 to decrease p53 levels, as a
result of activating protein-1 (AP-1)/c-Jun-mediated mouse double minute 2
homolog induction, contributed to transcriptional deregulation of the miRNAs.
Ga12QL induced ZEB1 and other epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers with
fibroblastoid phenotype change. Consistently, transfection with miR-200b, -192 or
-215 mimic prevented the ability of Ga12QL to increase tumor cell
migration/invasion. In xenograft studies, sustained knockdown of Ga12 decreased
the overall growth rate and average volume of tumors derived from SK-Hep1 cell
(mesenchymal-typed). In HCC patients, miR-192, -215 and/or -200a were deregulated
with microvascular invasion or growth advantage. In the HCC samples with higher
Ga12 level, a correlation existed in the comparison of relative changes of Ga12
and ZEB1. In conclusion, Ga12 overexpressed in HCC causes ZEB1 induction by
deregulating p53-responsive miRNAs, which may facilitate epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and growth of liver tumor. These findings highlight the significance
of Ga12 upregulation in liver tumor progression, implicating Ga12 as an
attractive therapeutic target.

PMID: 25065598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Urol. 2015 Feb;193(2):699-705. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.07.083. Epub 2014 Jul
22.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in penile squamous cell carcinoma.

Masferrer E(1), Ferrándiz-Pulido C(2), Masferrer-Niubò M(2), Rodríguez-Rodríguez 
A(2), Gil I(2), Pont A(2), Servitje O(2), García de Herreros A(2), Lloveras B(2),
García-Patos V(2), Pujol RM(2), Toll A(2), Hernández-Muñoz I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona,
Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar, Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions
Mèdiques, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (EM), Barcelona, Spain; Department of
Pathology (BL), Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain; Department
of Dermatology (RMP, AT), Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain; 
Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona (CF-P, VG-P), Barcelona, Spain; Department of Urology,
Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar, Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions
Mèdiques (AR-R), Barcelona, Spain; Department of Dermatology, Hospital
Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (OS),
Barcelona, Spain; Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques (AGdH),
Barcelona, Spain; Department of Mathematics, Universitad Nacional de Educación a 
Distancia, Madrid (MM-N), Spain; Department of Dermatology (IG), Hospital
Universitari St. Joan de Reus-Universitat Rovira i Virgili de Tarragona,
Tarragona, Spain; Department of Urology (AP), Hospital Universitari St. Joan de
Reus-Universitat Rovira i Virgili de Tarragona, Tarragona, Spain. Electronic
address: emilimasferreriniubo@gmail.com. (2)Department of Dermatology, Facultat
de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar,
Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
(EM), Barcelona, Spain; Department of Pathology (BL), Hospital del Mar, Parc de
Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain; Department of Dermatology (RMP, AT), Hospital del
Mar, Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain; Department of Dermatology, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (CF-P, VG-P),
Barcelona, Spain; Department of Urology, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar,
Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques (AR-R), Barcelona, Spain;
Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut
d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (OS), Barcelona, Spain; Institut Hospital
del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques (AGdH), Barcelona, Spain; Department of
Mathematics, Universitad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, Madrid (MM-N), Spain;
Department of Dermatology (IG), Hospital Universitari St. Joan de
Reus-Universitat Rovira i Virgili de Tarragona, Tarragona, Spain; Department of
Urology (AP), Hospital Universitari St. Joan de Reus-Universitat Rovira i Virgili
de Tarragona, Tarragona, Spain.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2015 Feb;193(2):396-7.

PURPOSE: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is a phenomenon in epithelial
tumors that involves loss of intercellular adhesion, mesenchymal phenotype
acquisition and enhanced migratory potential. While the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition process has been extensively linked to metastatic progression of
squamous cell carcinoma, studies of the role of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in squamous cell carcinoma containing high risk human papillomaviruses
are scarce. Moreover, to our knowledge epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
involvement in human penile squamous cell carcinoma, which can arise through
transforming HPV infections or independently of HPV, has not been investigated.
We evaluated the presence of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers and
their relationship to HPV in penile squamous cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We assessed the expression of E-cadherin, vimentin and the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition related transcription factors Twist, Zeb1
and Snail by immunohistochemical staining in 64 penile squamous cell carcinoma
cases. HPV was detected by polymerase chain reaction amplification.
RESULTS: Simultaneous loss of membranous E-cadherin expression and vimentin over 
expression were noted in 43.5% of penile squamous cell carcinoma cases. HPV was
significantly associated with loss of membranous E-cadherin but not with
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Recurrence and mortality rates were
significantly higher in cases showing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that in penile squamous cell carcinoma
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is associated with poor prognosis but not
with the presence of HPV.

Copyright © 2015 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25063494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 24;9(7):e102927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102927.
eCollection 2014.

Correlation between EGFR amplification and the expression of microRNA-200c in
primary glioblastoma multiforme.

Serna E(1), Lopez-Gines C(2), Monleon D(3), Muñoz-Hidalgo L(3), Callaghan RC(2), 
Gil-Benso R(2), Martinetto H(4), Gregori-Romero A(2), Gonzalez-Darder J(5),
Cerda-Nicolas M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Central de Investigación en Medicina, Universitat de València,
Valencia, Spain. (2)Departamento de Patología, Universitat de Valencia, Valencia,
Spain. (3)Fundación de Investigación del Hospital Clínico Universitario de
Valencia/INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain. (4)Department of Neuropathology, Institute for
Neurological Research, FLENI, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (5)Servicio de
Neurocirugía, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Extensive infiltration of the surrounding healthy brain tissue is a critical
feature in glioblastoma. Several miRNAs have been related to gliomagenesis, some 
of them related with the EGFR pathway. We have evaluated whole-genome miRNA
expression profiling associated with different EGFR amplification patterns,
studied by fluorescence in situ hybridization in tissue microarrays, of 30 cases 
of primary glioblastoma multiforme, whose clinicopathological and
immunohistochemical features have also been analyzed. MicroRNA-200c showed a very
significant difference between tumors having or not EGFR amplification. This
microRNA plays an important role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition, but its
implication in the behavior of glioblastoma is largely unknown. With respect to
EGFR status our cases were categorized into three groups: high level EGFR
amplification, low level EGFR amplification, and no EGFR amplification. Our
results showed that microRNA-200c and E-cadherin expression are down-regulated,
while ZEB1 is up-regulated, when tumors showed a high level of EGFR
amplification. Conversely, ZEB1 mRNA expression levels were significantly lower
in the group of tumors without EGFR amplification. Tumors with a low level of
EGFR amplification showed ZEB1 expression levels comparable to those detected in 
the group with a high level of amplification. In this study we provide what is to
our knowledge the first report of association between microRNA-200c and EGFR
amplification in glioblastomas.

PMCID: PMC4109944
PMID: 25058589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 21;9(7):e102164. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102164.
eCollection 2014.

Real-time imaging of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition using microRNA-200a
sequence-based molecular beacon-conjugated magnetic nanoparticles.

Choi Y(1), Kim HS(2), Woo J(3), Hwang EH(3), Cho KW(2), Kim S(4), Moon WK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Jongro-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Radiology, Seoul
National University Hospital, Jongro-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department 
of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital, Jongro-gu, Seoul, Republic of
Korea; The Institute of Radiation Medicine, Medical Research Center, Seoul
National University, Jongro-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital, Jongro-gu, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Biomedical Sciences, CHA 
University, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Jongro-gu, Seoul,
Republic of Korea; Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital,
Jongro-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea; The Institute of Radiation Medicine, Medical
Research Center, Seoul National University, Jongro-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays important roles in tumor
progression to metastasis. Thus, the development of an imaging probe that can
monitor transient periods of the EMT process in live cells is required for a
better understanding of metastatic process. Inspired by the fact that the mRNA
expression levels of zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) increase when
cells adopt mesenchyme characteristics and that microRNA-200a (miR-200a) can bind
to ZEB1 mRNA, we conjugated molecular beacon (MB) mimicking mature miR-200a to
magnetic nanoparticles (miR-200a-MB-MNPs) and devised an imaging method to
observe transitional changes in the cells during EMT. Transforming growth
factor-ß1 treated epithelial cells and breast cancer cell lines representing both
epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes were used for the validation of
miR-200a-MB-MNPs as an EMT imaging probe. The real-time imaging of live cells
acquired with the induction of EMT revealed an increase in fluorescence signals
by miR-200a-MB-MNPs, cell morphology alterations, and the loss of cell-cell
adhesion. Our results suggest that miR-200a-MB-MNPs can be used as an imaging
probe for the real-time monitoring of the EMT process in live cells.

PMCID: PMC4105468
PMID: 25048580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Oncogene. 2015 May 21;34(21):2741-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.215. Epub 2014 Jul
21.

DAB2IP regulates cancer stem cell phenotypes through modulating stem cell factor 
receptor and ZEB1.

Yun EJ(1), Baek ST(2), Xie D(3), Tseng SF(1), Dobin T(1), Hernandez E(1), Zhou
J(4), Zhang L(4), Yang J(5), Sun H(5), Xiao G(5), He D(6), Kittler R(7), Hsieh
JT(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (3)Department of General Surgery,
Tongji Cancer Research Institute, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China. (4)1] Department of Urology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA [2] Department of Urology, The
First Affiliated Hospital, Medical School of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an,
China. (5)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (6)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Medical School of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. (7)1]
Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA [2] Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA [3] Development, Simmons
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA. (8)1] Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA [2] Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Cancer stem cell (CSC), the primary source of cancer-initiating population, is
involved in cancer recurrence and drug-resistant phenotypes. This study
demonstrates that the loss of DAB2IP, a novel Ras-GTPase activating protein
frequently found in many cancer types, is associated with CSC properties.
Mechanistically, DAB2IP is able to suppress stem cell factor receptor (c-kit or
CD117) gene expression by interacting with a newly identified silencer in the
c-kit gene. Moreover, DAB2IP is able to inhibit c-kit-PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling
pathway that increases c-myc protein to activate ZEB1 gene expression leading to 
the elevated CSC phenotypes. An inverse correlation between CD117 or ZEB1 and
DAB2IP is also found in clinical specimens. Similarly, Elevated expression of
ZEB1 and CD117 are found in the prostate basal cell population of DAB2IP knockout
mice. Our study reveals that DAB2IP has a critical role in modulating CSC
properties via CD117-mediated ZEB1 signaling pathway.

PMID: 25043300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Nanoscale. 2014 Sep 7;6(17):10084-94. doi: 10.1039/c4nr01518e.

ZEB1 knockdown mediated using polypeptide cationic micelles inhibits metastasis
and effects sensitization to a chemotherapeutic drug for cancer therapy.

Fang S(1), Wu L, Li M, Yi H, Gao G, Sheng Z, Gong P, Ma Y, Cai L.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nanomedicine, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Cancer
Nanotechnology, Institute of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Institutes
of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, 
P. R. China. lt.cai@siat.ac.cn.

Metastasis and drug resistance are the main causes for the failure in clinical
cancer therapy. Emerging evidence suggests an intricate role of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem cells (CSCs) in
metastasis and drug resistance. The EMT-activator ZEB1 is crucial in malignant
tumor progression by linking EMT-activation and stemness-maintenance. Here, we
used multifunctional polypeptide micelle nanoparticles (NP) as nanocarriers for
the delivery of ZEB1 siRNA and doxorubicin (DOX). The nanocarriers could
effectively deliver siRNA to the cytoplasm and knockdown the target gene in H460 
cells and H460 xenograft tumors, leading to reduced EMT and repressed CSC
properties in vitro and in vivo. The complex micelle nanoparticles with ZEB1
siRNA (siRNA-NP) significantly reduced metastasis in the lung. When DOX and siRNA
were co-delivered by the nanocarriers (siRNA-DOX-NP), a synergistic therapeutic
effect was observed, resulting in dramatic inhibition of tumor growth in a H460
xenograft model. These results demonstrated that the siRNA-NP or siRNA-DOX-NP
complex targeting ZEB1 could be developed into a new therapeutic approach for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment.

PMID: 25032749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Br J Cancer. 2014 Aug 26;111(5):883-93. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.387. Epub 2014 Jul 
15.

Elevated HOXB9 expression promotes differentiation and predicts a favourable
outcome in colon adenocarcinoma patients.

Zhan J(1), Niu M(1), Wang P(1), Zhu X(2), Li S(1), Song J(1), He H(2), Wang Y(3),
Xue L(4), Fang W(2), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [2]
State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [3] Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology
and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. (2)1] Key Laboratory of 
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [2] Laboratory of
Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China. (3)1] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research, Ministry of Education, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China [2] State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic 
Drugs, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [3]
Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, China. (4)1] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research, Ministry of Education, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100191, China [2] Department of Biochemistry, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the tumour suppressive proteins and the
underlying mechanisms that suppress colon cancer progression.
Homeodomain-containing transcription factor HOXB9 plays an important role in
embryogenesis and cancer development. We here aim to uncover the potential role
of HOXB9 in the regulation of colon adenocarcinoma progression including
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
METHODS: HOXB9 expression in colon adenocarcinoma cells and patients was analysed
by western blot and immunohistochemistry separately. Correlation between HOXB9
expressions with patients' survival was assessed by Kaplan-Meier analysis.
HOXB9-regulated target gene expression was determined by RNA sequencing in
HOXB9-overexpressing colon adenocarcinoma cells.
RESULTS: Elevated HOXB9 expression was identified in well-differentiated colon
adenocarcinoma patients and was associated with a better overall patients'
survival. Overexpression of HOXB9 inhibited colon adenocarcinoma cell growth,
migration, invasion in vitro and tumour growth, liver as well as lung metastases 
in nude mice; whereas silencing HOXB9 promoted these functions. HOXB9 promoted
colon adenocarcinoma differentiation via a mechanism that stimulates
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, involving downregulation of EMT-promoting
transcriptional factors including Snail, Twist, FOXC2 and ZEB1 and upregulation
of epithelial proteins including E-cadherin, claudins-1, -4, -7, occludin and
ZO-1.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB9 is a novel tumour suppressor that inhibits colon
adenocarcinoma progression by inducing differentiation. Elevated expression of
HOXB9 predicts a longer survival in colon adenocarcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC4150282
PMID: 25025961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jul 14;20(26):8545-57. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i26.8545.

Clobenpropit enhances anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer.

Paik WH(1), Ryu JK(1), Jeong KS(1), Park JM(1), Song BJ(1), Lee SH(1), Kim YT(1),
Yoon YB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Woo Hyun Paik, Department of Internal Medicine, Inje University Ilsan Paik
Hospital, Koyang 411-706, South Korea.

AIM: To evaluate the anti-tumor effect of clobenpropit, which is a specific H3
antagonist and H4 agonist, in combination with gemcitabine in a pancreatic cancer
cell line.
METHODS: Three kinds of human pancreatic cancer cell lines (Panc-1, MiaPaCa-2,
and AsPC-1) were used in this study. Expression of H3 and H4 receptors in
pancreatic cancer cells was identified with Western blotting. Effects of
clobenpropit on cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis were evaluated.
Alteration of epithelial and mesenchymal markers after administration of
clobenpropit was analyzed. An in vivo study with a Panc-1 xenograft mouse model
was also performed.
RESULTS: H4 receptors were present as 2 subunits in human pancreatic cancer
cells, while there was no expression of H3 receptor. Clobenpropit inhibited cell 
migration and increased apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells in combination with 
gemcitabine. Clobenpropit up-regulated E-cadherin, but down-regulated vimentin
and matrix metalloproteinase 9 in real-time polymerase chain reaction. Also,
clobenpropit inhibited tumor growth (gemcitabine 294 ± 46 mg vs combination 154 ±
54 mg, P = 0.02) and enhanced apoptosis in combination with gemcitabine (control 
2.5%, gemcitabine 25.8%, clobenpropit 9.7% and combination 40.9%, P = 0.001) by
up-regulation of E-cadherin and down-regulation of Zeb1 in Panc-1 xenograft
mouse.
CONCLUSION: Clobenpropit enhanced the anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine in
pancreatic cancer cells through inhibition of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition process.

PMCID: PMC4093704
PMID: 25024609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 10;9(7):e102084. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102084.
eCollection 2014.

Forkhead box L1 is frequently downregulated in gallbladder cancer and inhibits
cell growth through apoptosis induction by mitochondrial dysfunction.

Qin Y(1), Gong W(1), Zhang M(1), Wang J(1), Tang Z(1), Quan Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, Affiliated to School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Forkhead box L1 (FOXL1), considered as a novel candidate tumor
suppressor, suppresses proliferation and invasion in certain cancers. However,
the regulation and function of FOXL1 in gallbladder cancer (GBC) remains unclear.
METHODS: FOXL1 expression at mRNA and protein levels in GBC tissues and cell
lines were examined by RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and western blot assay. FOXL1
expression in GBC cell lines was up-regulated by transfection with pcDNA-FOXL1.
The effects of FOXL1 overexpression on cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration
and invasion were evaluated in vitro or in vivo. In addition, the status of
mediators involved in migration, invasion and apoptosis was examined using
western blot after transfection with pcDNA-FOXL1.
RESULTS: FOXL1 was frequently downregulated in GBC tissues and cell lines. Its
higher expression is associated with better prognosis, while its lower expression
is correlated with advanced TNM stage and poor differentiation. FOXL1
overexpression in NOZ cells significantly suppresses cell proliferation,
migration and invasion in vitro and tumorigenicity in nude mice. FOXL1
overexpression disrupted mitochondrial transmembrane potential and triggered
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis in NOZ cells. In addition, FOXL1 overexpression
suppressed ZEB1 expression and induced E-cadherin expression in NOZ cells.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested that dysregulated FOXL1 is involved in
tumorigenesis and progression of GBC and may serve as a predictor of clinical
outcome or even a therapeutic target for patients with GBC.

PMCID: PMC4092092
PMID: 25010679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nat Commun. 2014 Jul 9;5:4335. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5335.

An ALS-associated mutation in the FUS 3'-UTR disrupts a microRNA-FUS regulatory
circuitry.

Dini Modigliani S(1), Morlando M(2), Errichelli L(3), Sabatelli M(4), Bozzoni
I(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Life Nano Science@Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Viale Regina Elena 291, 00161 Rome, Italy [2]. (2)1] Department of Biology and
Biotechnology Charles Darwin and IBPM, Sapienza University of Rome, P.le A. Moro 
5, 00185 Rome, Italy [2]. (3)1] Center for Life Nano Science@Sapienza, Istituto
Italiano di Tecnologia, Viale Regina Elena 291, 00161 Rome, Italy [2] Department 
of Biology and Biotechnology Charles Darwin and IBPM, Sapienza University of
Rome, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. (4)Institute Pasteur Fondazione
Cenci-Bolognetti, Sapienza University of Rome, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(5)1] Center for Life Nano Science@Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Viale Regina Elena 291, 00161 Rome, Italy [2] Department of Biology and
Biotechnology Charles Darwin and IBPM, Sapienza University of Rome, P.le A. Moro 
5, 00185 Rome, Italy [3] Department of Geriatrics, Neuroscience and Orthopedics, 
Institute of Neurology, Catholic University, L.go A. Gemelli 8, 00168 Rome,
Italy.

While the physiologic functions of the RNA-binding protein FUS still await
thorough characterization, the pathonegetic role of FUS mutations in amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) is clearly established. Here we find that a human FUS
mutation that leads to increased protein expression, and was identified in two
ALS patients with severe outcome, maps to the seed sequence recognized by miR-141
and miR-200a in the 3'-UTR of FUS. We demonstrate that FUS and these microRNAs
are linked by a feed-forward regulatory loop where FUS upregulates miR-141/200a, 
which in turn impact FUS protein synthesis. We also show that Zeb1, a target of
miR-141/200a and transcriptional repressor of these two microRNAs, is part of the
circuitry and reinforces it. Our results reveal a possible correlation between
deregulation of this regulatory circuit and ALS pathogenesis, and open
interesting perspectives in the treatment of these mutations through ad
hoc-modified microRNAs.

PMID: 25004804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;36(4):245-9.

[Preliminary study of the inhibitory effect and mechanism of
B16F10-ESAT-6-gpi/IL-21 vaccine on the pulmonary metastasis in mouse models of
melanoma].

[Article in Chinese]

He X(1), Shi W, Zhao F, Wang J, Xu X, Tan Q, Sun Y, Chen D, Dou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Nantong Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Nantong
University, Nantong 226361, China. (2)Email: njdoujun@sina.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect and mechanism of B16F10-ESAT-6-gpi/IL-21
tumor cell vaccine on pulmonary metastasis in mouse model of melanoma.
METHODS: Twelve 8-week old female C57BL/6 mice were used in this study. The mice 
were injected with wild-type B16F10 cells through tail vein after immunization
with B16F10-ESAT-6-gpi/IL-21 tumor cell vaccine, and the pulmonary metastasis was
observed. The CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells were isolated by magnetic activated cell 
sorting, and then used for the detection of CFSE/7-AAD cytotoxicity by flow
cytometry. Serum from the mice immunized with tumor-cell vaccine was used to
detect IFN-<U+03B3> expression by ELISA. The expression of TGF-ß2, ZEB1, E-cadherin, and
N-cadherin of tumor tissues was detected by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence,
respectively.
RESULTS: The mice vaccinated with B16F10-ESAT-6-gpi/IL-21 had significantly fewer
nodules in the lung and lower lung weight [(285.8 ± 19.01) mg vs. (406.3 ± 27.12)
mg], with lower levels of TGF-ß2, ZEB1 and N-cadherin proteins but higher level
of E-cadherin protein within the tumor tissue, as compared with the control mice.
Meanwhile, the immunized mice had significantly increased CD8(+) T cell killing
activity [(42.62 ± 3.465)% vs. (22.29 ± 1.804)%] and IFN-<U+03B3> expression level
[(55.200 ± 7.173) pg/ml vs. (6.435 ± 1.339) pg/ml] over the control mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The B16F10-ESAT-6-gpi/IL-21 vaccine can inhibit the metastasis of
melanoma in the lung in vaccinated melanoma-bearing mice. This inhibitory effect 
is associated with CD8(+) T cell immune response and a higher level of IFN-<U+03B3>,
which may influence on the mesenchymal-epithelial transition of tumor cells.

PMID: 24989908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Genes Immun. 2014 Oct;15(7):440-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2014.34. Epub 2014 Jul 3.

Characterization of a weakly expressed KIR2DL1 variant reveals a novel upstream
promoter that controls KIR expression.

Wright PW(1), Li H(1), Huehn A(2), O'Connor GM(2), Cooley S(3), Miller JS(3),
Anderson SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research Inc., Lab of Experimental
Immunology, Frederick National Lab, Frederick, MD, USA. (2)Cancer and
Inflammation Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, MD, USA. (3)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (4)1] Basic Science Program,
Leidos Biomedical Research Inc., Lab of Experimental Immunology, Frederick
National Lab, Frederick, MD, USA [2] Cancer and Inflammation Program, Center for 
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA.

Members of the human KIR (killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor) class I major
histocompatibility complex receptor gene family contain multiple promoters that
determine the variegated expression of KIR on natural killer cells. In order to
identify novel genetic alterations associated with decreased KIR expression, a
group of donors was characterized for KIR gene content, transcripts and protein
expression. An individual with a single copy of the KIR2DL1 gene but a very low
level of gene expression was identified. The low expression phenotype was
associated with a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that created a binding
site for the inhibitory ZEB1 (Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1) transcription
factor adjacent to a c-Myc binding site previously implicated in distal promoter 
activity. Individuals possessing this SNP had a substantial decrease in distal
KIR2DL1 transcripts initiating from a novel intermediate promoter located 230<U+2009>bp 
upstream of the proximal promoter start site. Surprisingly, there was no decrease
in transcription from the KIR2DL1 proximal promoter. Reduced intermediate
promoter activity revealed the existence of alternatively spliced KIR2DL1
transcripts containing premature termination codons that initiated from the
proximal KIR2DL1 promoter. Altogether, these results indicate that distal
transcripts are necessary for KIR2DL1 protein expression and are required for
proper processing of sense transcripts from the bidirectional proximal promoter.

PMCID: PMC4208966
PMID: 24989671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jun 28;14:472. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-472.

Matrix metalloproteinase 1 and circulating tumor cells in early breast cancer.

Cierna Z, Mego M(1), Janega P, Karaba M, Minarik G, Benca J, Sedlácková T,
Cingelova S, Gronesova P, Manasova D, Pindak D, Sufliarsky J, Danihel L, Reuben
JM, Mardiak J.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Unit, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
misomego@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in cancer invasion and 
metastasis. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) play role in tumor dissemination and
are an independent survival predictor in breast cancer (BC) patients. The aim of 
this study was to assess correlation between CTCs and tumor MMP1 in BC.
METHODS: Study included 149 primary BC patients treated by surgery from March
2012 to March 2013. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were depleted of
hematopoietic cells using RossetteSep(TM) selection kit. RNA extracted from
CD45-depleted PBMC was interrogated for expression of EMT (TWIST1, SNAIL1, SLUG, 
ZEB1) and epithelial (CK19) gene transcripts by qRT-PCR. Patient samples with
higher epithelial and/or mesenchymal gene transcripts than those of healthy
donors (n = 60) were considered as CTC positive. Expression of MMP1 in surgical
specimens was evaluated by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: CTCs were detected in 24.2% patients. CTCs exhibiting only epithelial
markers were present in 8.7% patients, whereas CTCs with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) markers (CTC_EMT) were observed in 13.4% of patients and CTCs
co-expressing both markers were detected in 2.0% patients. Patients with CTC_EMT 
in peripheral blood had significantly increased expression of MMP1 in tumor cells
(p = 0.02) and tumor associated stroma (p = 0.05) than those of patients without 
CTC_EMT. In multivariate analysis, CTC_EMT and tumor grade were independently
associated with MMP1 expression in cancer cells, while CTC_EMT and Ki67 were
independently associated with MMP1 expression in cancer associated stroma.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest link between MMP1 and CTCs with EMT phenotype and
support role of MMPs and EMT in tumor dissemination.

PMCID: PMC4079912
PMID: 24972610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Endocrine. 2015 Mar;48(2):566-74. doi: 10.1007/s12020-014-0326-7. Epub 2014 Jun
27.

Down-regulation of miR-144 promotes thyroid cancer cell invasion by targeting
ZEB1 and ZEB2.

Guan H(1), Liang W, Xie Z, Li H, Liu J, Liu L, Xiu L, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Center, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Sun Yat-sen University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, Guangdong,
China.

Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy, and its incidence has
increased rapidly worldwide. The molecular mechanisms underlying thyroid cancer
tumorigenesis still need to be further investigated. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), short
RNA molecules of approximately 22 nucleotides in length, play crucial roles in
tumorigenesis. In the present study, we found that the expression of miR-144 was 
significantly down-regulated in thyroid cancer as compared with that in normal
thyroid tissues, suggesting that miR-144 may be involved in thyroid cancer
tumorigenesis. Moreover, our results showed that restoration of miR-144 in K1 and
WRO thyroid cancer cells could suppress the invasion and migration capability of 
these cells. We also demonstrated that miR-144 suppressed the expression of ZEB1 
and ZEB2, two E-cadherin suppressors, by directly binding to their
3'-untranslated regions. Furthermore, restoration of ZEB1 or ZEB2 partially
rescued the miR-144-induced inhibition of cell invasion. These data suggest
miR-144 function as a tumor suppressor in thyroid cancer.

PMID: 24968735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 26;9(6):e101088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101088.
eCollection 2014.

The tetraindole SK228 reverses the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of breast
cancer cells by up-regulating members of the miR-200 family.

Wang CH(1), Chen CL(2), More SV(2), Hsiao PW(3), Hung WC(4), Li WS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Agricultural
Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)National
Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, Tainan,
Taiwan. (5)Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Doctoral
Degree Program in Marine Biotechnology, National Sun Yat-Sen University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

The results of recent studies have shown that metastasis, the most common
malignancy and primary cause of mortality promoted by breast cancer in women, is 
associated with the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The results of
the current study show that SK228, a novel indole containing substance, exhibits 
anti-cancer activity. In addition, the effects of SK228 on the regulation of EMT 
in breast cancer cells as well as the underlying mechanism have been explored.
SK228 was observed to induce a fibroblastoid to epithelial-like change in the
appearance of various breast cancer cell lines and to suppress the migration and 
invasion of these cancer cells in vitro. Moreover, expression of E-cadherin was
found to increase following SK228 treatment whereas ZEB1 expression was
repressed. Expression of other major EMT inducers, including ZEB2, Slug and
Twist1, is also repressed by SK228 as a consequence of up-regulation of members
of the miR-200 family, especially miR-200c. The results of animal studies
demonstrate that SK228 treatment leads to effective suppression of breast cancer 
growth and metastasis in vivo. The observations made in this investigation show
that SK228 reverses the EMT process in breast cancer cells via an effect on the
miR-200c/ZEB1/E-cadherin signalling pathway. In addition, the results of a
detailed analysis of the in vivo anti-cancer activities of SK228, carried out
using a breast cancer xenograft animal model, show that this substance is a
potential chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4072721
PMID: 24967704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 24;9(6):e100249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100249.
eCollection 2014.

Tumor cell heterogeneity in Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC): phenotypical and
functional differences associated with Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT)
and DNA methylation changes.

Krohn A(1), Ahrens T(2), Yalcin A(1), Plönes T(3), Wehrle J(1), Taromi S(1),
Wollner S(1), Follo M(1), Brabletz T(4), Mani SA(5), Claus R(1), Hackanson B(1), 
Burger M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University
Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Department of Pathology, University Medical
Center, Freiburg, Germany; University of Freiburg, Faculty of Biology, Freiburg, 
Germany. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center
Witten/Herdecke, Köln, Germany. (4)Department for Visceral Surgery, University
Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of Translational Molecular
Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(6)Department of Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University
Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany; University Furtwangen, Faculty of Medical and 
Life Sciences, Campus VS-Schwenningen, Villingen-Schwenningen, Germany.

Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) is a specific subtype of lung cancer presenting as 
highly metastatic disease with extremely poor prognosis. Despite responding
initially well to chemo- or radiotherapy, SCLC almost invariably relapses and
develops resistance to chemotherapy. This is suspected to be related to tumor
cell subpopulations with different characteristics resembling stem cells.
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is known to play a key role in metastatic
processes and in developing drug resistance. This is also true for NSCLC, but
there is very little information on EMT processes in SCLC so far. SCLC, in
contrast to NSCLC cell lines, grow mainly in floating cell clusters and a minor
part as adherent cells. We compared these morphologically different
subpopulations of SCLC cell lines for EMT and epigenetic features, detecting
significant differences in the adherent subpopulations with high levels of
mesenchymal markers such as Vimentin and Fibronectin and very low levels of
epithelial markers like E-cadherin and Zona Occludens 1. In addition, expression 
of EMT-related transcription factors such as Snail/Snai1, Slug/Snai2, and Zeb1,
DNA methylation patterns of the EMT hallmark genes, functional responses like
migration, invasion, matrix metalloproteases secretion, and resistance to
chemotherapeutic drug treatment all differed significantly between the sublines. 
This phenotypic variability might reflect tumor cell heterogeneity and EMT during
metastasis in vivo, accompanied by the development of refractory disease in
relapse. We propose that epigenetic regulation plays a key role during
phenotypical and functional changes in tumor cells and might therefore provide
new treatment options for SCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC4069054
PMID: 24959847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;20(17):4705-16. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0517.
Epub 2014 Jun 23.

Decreased expression of miR216a contributes to non-small-cell lung cancer
progression.

Wang RT(1), Xu M(2), Xu CX(3), Song ZG(4), Jin H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Respiratory and. (2)Orthopaedics, The General Hospital of
Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Molecular
Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida.
jinhua12001@gmail.com cheng-xiong.xu@moffitt.org. (4)Department of Pathology, The
General Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Science, College of Pharmacy, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida. jinhua12001@gmail.com cheng-xiong.xu@moffitt.org.

PURPOSE: The aim of the present study is to investigate the role and mechanism of
miR216a in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of miR216a in NSCLC cell lines and from NSCLC
patient specimens was measured by real-time qRT-PCR. The correlation between gene
expression and patient survival was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier methods. The
effects of miR216a on NSCLC cell growth and metastasis were examined both in
vitro and in vivo by overexpressing or inhibiting miR216a. Finally, the effect of
miR216a on chemoresistance was investigated by MTT assay and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: miR216a expression was downregulated in specimens from patients with
NSCLC compared with corresponding nontumor lung tissues. Clinical data indicate
that decreased miR216a expression is inversely correlated with cancer stage,
metastasis, and poor survival in patients with NSCLC. Our data also show that
overexpression of miR216a suppresses NSCLC cell growth and metastasis, and
enhances cisplatin-induced cell growth inhibition and apoptosis. In contrast,
inhibition of miR216a stimulates NSCLC cell growth and metastasis, and suppresses
cisplatin-induced cell growth inhibition and apoptosis. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that miR216a exerts its role by directly targeting eIF4B and ZEB1.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that miR216a is a cancer suppressor miRNA and
that overexpression of miR216a is a novel NSCLC treatment strategy. In addition, 
our clinical data indicate that miR216a may be a useful biomarker for predicting 
NSCLC progression.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24958806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Aug;16(4):266-75. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0086. Epub 2014 Jun
19.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor induces the expression of select epithelial genes
in mouse utricle sensory epithelia-derived progenitor cells.

Hu Z(1), Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-HNS, Wayne State University School of Medicine , 
Detroit, MI, 48201.

Mouse utricle sensory epithelial cell-derived progenitor cells (MUCs), which have
hair cell progenitor and mesenchymal features via epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) as previously described, provide a potential approach for hair
cell regeneration via cell transplantation. In this study, we treated MUCs with
trichostatin A (TSA) to determine whether histone deacetylase inhibitor is able
to stimulate the expression of epithelial genes in MUCs, an essential step for
guiding mesenchymal-like MUCs to become sensory epithelial cells. After 72 h of
TSA treatment, MUCs acquired epithelial-like features, which were indicated by
increased expression of epithelial markers such as Cdh1, Krt18, and Dsp.
Additionally, TSA decreased the expression of mesenchymal markers, including
Zeb1, Zeb2, Snai1, and Snai2, and prosensory genes Lfng, Six1, and Dlx5.
Moreover, the expression of the hair cell genes Atoh1 and Myo6 was increased in
TSA-treated MUCs. We also observed significantly decreased expression of Hdac2
and Hdac3 in TSA-treated MUCs. However, no remarkable change was detected in
protein expression using immunofluorescence, indicating that TSA-induced HDAC
inhibition may contribute to the initial stage of the mesenchymal-to-epithelial
phenotypic change. In the future, more work is needed to induce hair cell
regeneration using inner ear tissue-derived progenitors to achieve an entire
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

PMCID: PMC4116094
PMID: 24945595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Dec;134(12):2947-56. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.258. Epub 2014
Jun 18.

CD63 tetraspanin is a negative driver of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in 
human melanoma cells.

Lupia A(1), Peppicelli S(1), Witort E(1), Bianchini F(1), Carloni V(2),
Pimpinelli N(3), Urso C(4), Borgognoni L(5), Capaccioli S(1), Calorini L(1),
Lulli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio",
University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental and
Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (3)Clinical,
Preventive and Oncologic Dermatology Section, Department Critical Care Medicine
and Surgery, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (4)Department of Anatomic
Pathology, Santa Maria Annunziata Hospital, Florence, Italy. (5)Plastic Surgery
Unit, Regional Melanoma Referral Center, Tuscan Tumor Institute (ITT), Santa
Maria Annunziata Hospital, Florence, Italy.

The CD63 tetraspanin is highly expressed in the early stages of melanoma and
decreases in advanced lesions, suggesting it as a possible suppressor of tumor
progression. We employed loss- and gain-of-gene-function approaches to
investigate the role of CD63 in melanoma progression and acquisition of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program. We used two human melanoma
cell lines derived from primary tumors and one primary human melanoma cell line
isolated from a cutaneous metastasis, differing by levels of CD63 expression.
CD63-silenced melanoma cells showed enhanced motility and invasiveness with
downregulation of E-cadherin and upregulation of N-cadherin and Snail. In
parallel experiments, transient and stable ectopic expression of CD63 resulted in
a robust reduction of cell motility, invasiveness, and protease activities, which
was proportional to the increase in CD63 protein level. Transfected cells
overexpressing the highest level of CD63 when transplanted into immunodeficient
mice showed a reduced incidence and rate of tumor growth. Moreover, these cells
showed a reduction of N-cadherin, Vimentin, Zeb1, and a-SMA, and a significant
resistance to undergo an EMT program both in basal condition and in the following
stimulation with TGFß. Thus, our results establish a previously unreported
mechanistic link between the tetraspanin CD63 and EMT abrogation in melanoma.

PMID: 24940653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Surgery. 2014 Jul;156(1):97-108. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2014.02.018. Epub 2014 Feb
28.

Prognostic significance of Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) expression
in cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts in pancreatic head cancer.

Bronsert P(1), Kohler I(2), Timme S(2), Kiefer S(2), Werner M(3), Schilling O(4),
Vashist Y(5), Makowiec F(6), Brabletz T(7), Hopt UT(8), Bausch D(9), Kulemann
B(8), Keck T(9), Wellner UF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany;
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
peter.bronsert@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (2)Institute of Pathology, University
Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, University
Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Freiburg, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Institute for Molecular Medicine and Cell 
Research, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of General,
Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. (6)Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Freiburg, Germany; Clinic for General and Visceral Surgery, University Medical
Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (7)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Clinic for General and
Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(8)Clinic for General and Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany. (9)Clinic for General and Visceral Surgery, University Medical
Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Clinic for Surgery, University Clinic
Schleswig-Holstein Campus, Lübeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by an
aggressive biology and poor prognosis. Experimental evidence has suggested a role
for the transcriptional repressor Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) in 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, invasion, and metastasis in PDAC. ZEB1
expression has been observed in cancer cells as well as stromal fibroblasts. Our 
study aimed to evaluate the prognostic value of ZEB1 expression in PDAC tissue.
METHODS: Patient baseline and follow-up data were extracted from a prospectively 
maintained database. After clinicopathologic re-review, serial sliced tissue
slides were immunostained for ZEB1, E-cadherin, vimentin, and pan-cytokeratin.
ZEB1 expression in cancer cells and adjacent stromal fibroblasts was graded
separately and correlated to routine histopathologic parameters and survival
after resection.
RESULTS: A total of 117 cases of PDAC were included in the study. High ZEB1
expression in cancer cells and in stromal cancer-associated fibroblasts was
associated with poor prognosis. There was also a trend for poor prognosis with a 
lymph node ratio of greater than 0.10. In line with its role as an inducer of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, ZEB1 expression in cancer cells was positively
correlated with Vimentin expression and negatively with E-Cadherin expression. In
multivariate analysis, stromal ZEB1 expression grade was the only independent
factor of survival after resection.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that ZEB1 expression in cancer cells as well as in
stromal fibroblasts are strong prognostic factors in PDAC. Stromal ZEB1
expression is identified for the first time as an independent predictor of
survival after resection of PDAC. This observation suggests that therapies
targeting ZEB1 and its downstream pathways could hit both cancer cells and
supporting cancer-associated fibroblasts.

Copyright © 2014 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24929761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2014 Jun 9;239(7):813-822. [Epub ahead of print]

Zeb1 promotes androgen independence of prostate cancer via induction of stem
cell-like properties.

Li P(1), Wang J(2), Chu M(1), Zhang K(2), Yang R(1), Gao WQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Stem Cell Research
Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200030, China. (2)Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and
Related Genes, Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China Med-X Research Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China gao.weiqiang@sjtu.edu.cn
rangru@yahoo.com.

Current androgen deprivation therapy often leads to androgen independence.
However, mechanism of the therapeutic failure is still not well understood. Here,
we demonstrate elevated expression of Zeb1 in androgen-independent prostate
cancer cells and prostate tumors of castrated PTEN conditional knockout mice.
While Zeb1 shRNA resulted in a sensitization of androgen-independent prostate
cancer cells, forced Zeb1 expression caused androgen-dependent prostate cancer
cells to be more resistant to androgen deprivation. Moreover, such effects
appeared to be mediated by induction of pluripotent genes or stem cell-like
properties. Collectively, these findings suggest that inhibition of Zeb1 might be
a potential therapeutic strategy for treatment of androgen-independent prostate
cancer.

© 2014 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 24912507  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


389. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jul;124(7):3093-106. doi: 10.1172/JCI73351. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

MicroRNA-205 signaling regulates mammary stem cell fate and tumorigenesis.

Chao CH, Chang CC, Wu MJ, Ko HW, Wang D, Hung MC, Yang JY, Chang CJ.

Dysregulation of epigenetic controls is associated with tumorigenesis in response
to microenvironmental stimuli; however, the regulatory pathways involved in
epigenetic dysfunction are largely unclear. We have determined that a critical
epigenetic regulator, microRNA-205 (miR-205), is repressed by the ligand jagged1,
which is secreted from the tumor stroma to promote a cancer-associated stem cell 
phenotype. Knockdown of miR-205 in mammary epithelial cells promoted
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), disrupted epithelial cell polarity, and 
enhanced symmetric division to expand the stem cell population. Furthermore,
miR-205-deficient mice spontaneously developed mammary lesions, while activation 
of miR-205 markedly diminished breast cancer stemness. These data provide
evidence that links tumor microenvironment and microRNA-dependent regulation to
disruption of epithelial polarity and aberrant mammary stem cell division, which 
in turn leads to an expansion of stem cell population and tumorigenesis. This
study elucidates an important role for miR-205 in the regulation of mammary stem 
cell fate, suggesting a potential therapeutic target for limiting breast cancer
genesis.

PMCID: PMC4071406
PMID: 24911147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jul;124(7):3003-15. doi: 10.1172/JCI73048. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

CRIPTO1 expression in EGFR-mutant NSCLC elicits intrinsic EGFR-inhibitor
resistance.

Park KS, Raffeld M, Moon YW, Xi L, Bianco C, Pham T, Lee LC, Mitsudomi T, Yatabe 
Y, Okamoto I, Subramaniam D, Mok T, Rosell R, Luo J, Salomon DS, Wang Y, Giaccone
G.

The majority of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harbor
EGFR-activating mutations that can be therapeutically targeted by EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI), such as erlotinib and gefitinib. Unfortunately, a
subset of patients with EGFR mutations are refractory to EGFR-TKIs. Resistance to
EGFR inhibitors reportedly involves SRC activation and induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we have demonstrated that
overexpression of CRIPTO1, an EGF-CFC protein family member, renders
EGFR-TKI-sensitive and EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells resistant to erlotinib in culture
and in murine xenograft models. Furthermore, tumors from NSCLC patients with
EGFR-activating mutations that were intrinsically resistant to EGFR-TKIs
expressed higher levels of CRIPTO1 compared with tumors from patients that were
sensitive to EGFR-TKIs. Primary NSCLC cells derived from a patient with
EGFR-mutated NSCLC that was intrinsically erlotinib resistant were CRIPTO1
positive, but gained erlotinib sensitivity upon loss of CRIPTO1 expression during
culture. CRIPTO1 activated SRC and ZEB1 to promote EMT via microRNA-205 (miR-205)
downregulation. While miR-205 depletion induced erlotinib resistance, miR-205
overexpression inhibited CRIPTO1-dependent ZEB1 and SRC activation, restoring
erlotinib sensitivity. CRIPTO1-induced erlotinib resistance was directly mediated
through SRC but not ZEB1; therefore, cotargeting EGFR and SRC synergistically
attenuated growth of erlotinib-resistant, CRIPTO1-positive, EGFR-mutated NSCLC
cells in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that this combination may overcome
intrinsic EGFR-inhibitor resistance in patients with CRIPTO1-positive,
EGFR-mutated NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4071378
PMID: 24911146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Surg Oncol. 2014 Sep;110(4):430-8. doi: 10.1002/jso.23668. Epub 2014 Jun 4.

The microRNA-200 family--a potential diagnostic marker in hepatocellular
carcinoma?

Dhayat SA(1), Mardin WA, Köhler G, Bahde R, Vowinkel T, Wolters H, Senninger N,
Haier J, Mees ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Hospital Muenster,
Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) represents the main cause of death
among patients with cirrhotic liver disease, but little is known about mechanisms
of cirrhosis associated carcinogenesis. We investigated the diagnostic impact of 
microRNA-200 (miR-200) family members as important epigenetic regulators of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to differentiate between patients with
HCC and liver cirrhosis.
METHODS: Expression of the miR-200 family was investigated by qRT-PCR in
specimens of HCC patients with and without cirrhosis. Benign specimens with and
without cirrhosis served as controls. Expression of the EMT markers ZEB-1,
E-cadherin and vimentin was examined using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: MiR-200a and miR-200b were significantly downregulated in HCC (miR-200a:
-40.1% (P = 0.0002); miR-200b: -52.3% (P = 0.0002)), and in HCC cirrhotic tissue 
(miR-200a: -40.2% (P = 0.004); miR-200b: -51.1% (P = 0.007)) compared to liver
cirrhosis. Spearman's Rho analysis revealed a significant negative correlation of
miR-200a and miR-200b to the expression of the mesenchymal markers Vimentin (P < 
0.007) and ZEB-1 (P < 0.0005) and a significant positive correlation to the
epithelial marker E-cadherin (P < 0.0002).
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-200 family members and their targets are significantly
deregulated in HCC and liver cirrhosis. The miR-200 family is able to distinguish
between cirrhotic and HCC tissue and could serve as an early marker for
cirrhosis-associated HCC.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24895326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):7335-42. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2163-y. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition inducing transcription factors and
metastatic cancer.

Tania M(1), Khan MA, Fu J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Epigenetics and Oncology, The Research Center for
Preclinical Medicine, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, 646000, Sichuan, China,
mousumitania@yahoo.com.

The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important step for the
developmental process. Recent evidences support that EMT allows the tumor cells
to acquire invasive properties and to develop metastatic growth characteristics. 
Some of the transcription factors, which are actively involved in EMT process,
have a significant role in the EMT-metastasis linkage. A number of studies have
reported that EMT-inducing transcription factors (EMT-TFs), such as Twist, Snail,
Slug, and Zeb, are directly or indirectly involved in cancer cell metastasis
through a different signaling cascades, including the Akt, signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
Wnt pathways, with the ultimate consequence of the downregulation of E-cadherin
and upregulation of metastatic proteins, such as N-cadherin, vimentin, matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, etc. This review summarizes the update information on 
the association of EMT-TFs with cancer metastasis and the possible cancer
therapeutics via targeting the EMT-TFs.

PMID: 24880591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cancer Lett. 2014 Aug 28;351(1):151-61. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.05.011. Epub
2014 May 28.

XMD8-92 inhibits pancreatic tumor xenograft growth via a DCLK1-dependent
mechanism.

Sureban SM(1), May R(2), Weygant N(3), Qu D(3), Chandrakesan P(3),
Bannerman-Menson E(4), Ali N(5), Pantazis P(4), Westphalen CB(6), Wang TC(6),
Houchen CW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; The Peggy and Charles Stephenson 
Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States. (2)Department of Medicine,
The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104,
United States; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, United States. (3)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States. (4)COARE
Biotechnology Inc., Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States. (5)Department of
Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, United States; The Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma
City, OK 73104, United States. (6)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032,
United States. (7)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; The Peggy and
Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States.
Electronic address: courtney-houchen@ouhsc.edu.

XMD8-92 is a kinase inhibitor with anti-cancer activity against lung and cervical
cancers, but its effect on pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains
unknown. Doublecortin-like kinase1 (DCLK1) is upregulated in various cancers
including PDAC. In this study, we showed that XMD8-92 inhibits AsPC-1 cancer cell
proliferation and tumor xenograft growth. XMD8-92 treated tumors demonstrated
significant downregulation of DCLK1 and several of its downstream targets
(including c-MYC, KRAS, NOTCH1, ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL, SLUG, OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, KLF4,
LIN28, VEGFR1, and VEGFR2) via upregulation of tumor suppressor miRNAs let-7a,
miR-144, miR-200a-c, and miR-143/145; it did not however affect BMK1 downstream
genes p21 and p53. These data taken together suggest that XMD8-92 treatment
results in inhibition of DCLK1 and downstream oncogenic pathways (EMT,
pluripotency, angiogenesis and anti-apoptotic), and is a promising
chemotherapeutic agent against PDAC.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24880079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2014 Sep;21(9):703-11. doi: 10.1002/jhbp.125. Epub 
2014 May 27.

Tumor necrosis factor-a modulates epithelial mesenchymal transition mediators
ZEB2 and S100A4 to promote cholangiocarcinoma progression.

Techasen A(1), Namwat N, Loilome W, Duangkumpha K, Puapairoj A, Saya H, Yongvanit
P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories,
Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand; Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research Center, Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process strongly
contributes to cancer metastasis. This study was to investigate the alteration of
EMT-related proteins (ZEB1, ZEB2 and S100A4) in cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) tissues.
The effect of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) on the expression of those
molecules in CCA cells was investigated.
METHODS: The quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) assay was used to quantify ZEB1, ZEB2 and S100A4 mRNA levels in 50 CCA 
tissues and related its expression to clinicopathological data. ZEB2 protein
immunostaining was investigated in 165 CCA tissues. The effect of TNF-a on
EMT-related CCA cell migration was evaluated using qRT-PCR, immunofluorescence
and transwell migration assays.
RESULTS: ZEB2 and S100A4 mRNA levels were found to be higher in CCA tissues. High
levels of S100A4 mRNA and ZEB2 protein were significantly associated with CCA
metastasis (P = 0.04 and P = 0.03). Moreover, a trend toward statistical
association was found with high levels of both ZEB2 mRNA and protein with shorter
survival time (P = 0.10 and P = 0.19). In addition, TNF-a induced CCA cell
migration by the induction of transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) resulting in
ZEB2 and S100A4 mRNA and protein activation.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate that TNF-a plays crucial role in the
progression of CCA by activating TGF-ß signaling and the induction of ZEB2 and
S100A4, EMT-related proteins expression.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery.

PMID: 24867797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1246. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.219.

Wnt inhibitory factor 1 suppresses cancer stemness and induces cellular
senescence.

Ramachandran I(1), Ganapathy V(1), Gillies E(2), Fonseca I(3), Sureban SM(4),
Houchen CW(4), Reis A(5), Queimado L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, The University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (3)Serviço de Anatomia
Patológica, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Francisco Gentil and Instituto de
Anatomia Patológica, Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. (4)1] US 
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [2] Peggy
and Charles Stephenson Oklahoma Cancer Center, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [3] Department of Medicine, The
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (6)1] Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [2] US Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [3] Peggy and Charles
Stephenson Oklahoma Cancer Center, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [4] Department of Cell Biology, The University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA [5] Department of
Pediatrics, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
USA [6] The Oklahoma Tobacco Research Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

Hyperactivation of the Wingless-type (Wnt)/ß-catenin pathway promotes tumor
initiation, tumor growth and metastasis in various tissues. Although there is
evidence for the involvement of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway activation in salivary
gland tumors, the precise mechanisms are unknown. Here we report for the first
time that downregulation of the Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1) is a widespread
event in salivary gland carcinoma ex-pleomorphic adenoma (CaExPA). We also show
that WIF1 downregulation occurs in the CaExPA precursor lesion pleomorphic
adenoma (PA) and indicates a higher risk of progression from benign to malignant 
tumor. Our results demonstrate that diverse mechanisms including WIF1 promoter
hypermethylation and loss of heterozygosity contribute to WIF1 downregulation in 
human salivary gland tumors. In accordance with a crucial role in suppressing
salivary gland tumor progression, WIF1 re-expression in salivary gland tumor
cells inhibited cell proliferation, induced more differentiated phenotype and
promoted cellular senescence, possibly through upregulation of tumor-suppressor
genes, such as p53 and p21. Most importantly, WIF1 significantly diminished the
number of salivary gland cancer stem cells and the anchorage-independent cell
growth. Consistent with this observation, WIF1 caused a reduction in the
expression of pluripotency and stemness markers (OCT4 and c-MYC), as well as
adult stem cell self-renewal and multi-lineage differentiation markers, such as
WNT3A, TCF4, c-KIT and MYB. Furthermore, WIF1 significantly increased the
expression of microRNAs pri-let-7a and pri-miR-200c, negative regulators of
stemness and cancer progression. In addition, we show that WIF1 functions as a
positive regulator of miR-200c, leading to downregulation of BMI1, ZEB1 and ZEB2,
with a consequent increase in downstream targets such as E-cadherin. Our study
emphasizes the prognostic and therapeutic potential of WIF1 in human salivary
gland CaExPA. Moreover, our findings demonstrate a novel mechanism by which WIF1 
regulates cancer stemness and senescence, which might have major implications in 
the field of cancer biology.

PMCID: PMC4047921
PMID: 24853424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cancer Res. 2014 Jul 15;74(14):3659-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3231. Epub 
2014 May 20.

Novel strategies to enforce an epithelial phenotype in mesenchymal cells.

Dragoi AM(1), Swiss R(1), Gao B(1), Agaisse H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of
Medicine, Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(2)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of
Medicine, Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
herve.agaisse@yale.edu.

E-cadherin downregulation in cancer cells is associated with
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastatic prowess, but the
underlying mechanisms are incompletely characterized. In this study, we probed
E-cadherin expression at the plasma membrane as a functional assay to identify
genes involved in E-cadherin downregulation. The assay was based on the
E-cadherin-dependent invasion properties of the intracellular pathogen Listeria
monocytogenes. On the basis of a functional readout, automated microscopy and
computer-assisted image analysis were used to screen siRNAs targeting 7,000 human
genes. The validity of the screen was supported by its definition of several
known regulators of E-cadherin expression, including ZEB1, HDAC1, and MMP14. We
identified three new regulators (FLASH, CASP7, and PCGF1), the silencing of which
was sufficient to restore high levels of E-cadherin transcription. In addition,
we identified two new regulators (FBXL5 and CAV2), the silencing of which was
sufficient to increase E-cadherin expression at a posttranscriptional level.
FLASH silencing regulated the expression of E-cadherin and other ZEB1-dependent
genes, through posttranscriptional regulation of ZEB1, but it also regulated the 
expression of numerous ZEB1-independent genes with functions predicted to
contribute to a restoration of the epithelial phenotype. Finally, we also report 
the identification of siRNA duplexes that potently restored the epithelial
phenotype by mimicking the activity of known and putative microRNAs. Our findings
suggest new ways to enforce epithelial phenotypes as a general strategy to treat 
cancer by blocking invasive and metastatic phenotypes associated with EMT.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4102654
PMID: 24845104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):8103-14. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2056-0. Epub 2014
May 20.

HIFs enhance the migratory and neoplastic capacities of hepatocellular carcinoma 
cells by promoting EMT.

Liu Y(1), Liu Y, Yan X, Xu Y, Luo F, Ye J, Yan H, Yang X, Huang X, Zhang J, Ji G.

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinic Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210011,
Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most fatal cancers. Although the
involvement of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in HCC progression 
is established, the mechanisms modulating this phenomenon remain unclear. Here,
we demonstrate that hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), HIF-1a and HIF-2a, modulate
the EMT through Twist1, a regulator of the EMT. The levels of HIF-1a and HIF-2a
in HCC tissues were higher than those in matched, non-tumor surrounding tissues. 
In HCC samples, the levels of HIF-1a and HIF-2a negatively correlated with the
levels of E-cadherin but positively correlated with the levels of vimentin. In
highly metastatic MHCC97H cells, the levels of HIF-1a, HIF-2a, and Twist1 were
higher than those in weakly metastatic HepG2 cells. In HepG2 cells,
over-expression of HIFs enhanced levels of Twist1 and the EMT, which elevated the
migratory and neoplastic capacities of cells. For MHCC97H cells, inhibition of
HIFs reduced Twist1 levels and the EMT, which reduced their migratory and
neoplastic capacity. Thus, the promotion of EMT by HIFs via Twist1 enhanced the
migration and neoplastic capacities of HCC cells.

PMID: 24840636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Cancer Sci. 2014 Jul;105(7):755-62. doi: 10.1111/cas.12436. Epub 2014 Jul 3.

Busulfan inhibits growth of human osteosarcoma through miR-200 family microRNAs
in vitro and in vivo.

Mei Q(1), Li F, Quan H, Liu Y, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)169th Hospital, School of Medicine, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.

Osteosarcoma typically arises in tissues of mesenchymal origin, and is the most
malignant bone tumor characterized by high local aggressiveness, with poor
therapeutic outcome. Busulfan has been widely used to treat CML. So far, there
are no reports on the therapeutic effect of busulfan on osteosarcoma. Here, we
showed that busulfan dose-dependently reduced the cell viability and
proliferation, and induced cell apoptosis, senescence, and reactive oxygen
species levels in two osteosarcoma cell lines. Moreover, a series of
loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments further indicated that busulfan
may have its anti-osteosarcoma effect by upregulating the microRNA-200 (miR-200) 
family which subsequently downregulated its target genes ZEB1 and ZEB2.
Furthermore, treatment with busulfan potentially inhibited the growth of
implanted osteosarcoma in nude mice. Taken together, our data suggest that
busulfan may have an anti-osteosarcoma effect through downregulating ZEB1 and
ZEB2 through activating the miR-200 family, highlighting a possibility of using
busulfan as a novel therapy for osteosarcoma.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317920
PMID: 24815002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cancer Manag Res. 2014 Apr 25;6:205-16. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S38156. eCollection
2014.

Role of microRNA in epithelial to mesenchymal transition and metastasis and
clinical perspectives.

Díaz-López A(1), Moreno-Bueno G(2), Cano A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM),
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. (2)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto 
Sols" (CSIC-UAM), IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain ; Fundación MDAnderson Internacional,
Madrid, Spain.

The microRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small, 20-22 nucleotides in length,
endogenously expressed noncoding RNAs that regulate multiple targets
posttranscriptionally. Interestingly, miRNAs have emerged as regulators of most
physiological and pathological processes, including metastatic tumor progression,
in part by controlling a reversible process called epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The activation of EMT increases the migratory and invasive
properties fundamental for tumor cell spread while activation of the reverse
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition is required for metastasis outgrowth. The
EMT triggering leads to the activation of a core of transcription factors
(EMT-TFs) - SNAIL1/SNAIL2, bHLH (E47, E2-2, and TWIST1/TWIST2), and ZEB1/ZEB2 -
that act as E-cadherin repressors and, ultimately, coordinate EMT. Recent
evidence indicates that several miRNAs regulate the expression of EMT-TFs or
EMT-activating signaling pathways. Interestingly, some miRNAs and EMT-TFs form
tightly interconnected negative feedback loops that control epithelial cell
plasticity, providing self-reinforcing signals and robustness to maintain the
epithelial or mesenchymal cell status. Among the most significant feedback loops,
we focus on the ZEB/miR-200 and the SNAIL1/miR-34 networks that hold a clear
impact in the regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal state. Recent insights
into the p53 modulation of the EMT-TF/miRNA loops and epigenetic regulatory
mechanisms in the context of metastasis dissemination will also be discussed.
Understanding the regulation of EMT by miRNAs opens new avenues for the diagnosis
and prognosis of tumors and identifies potential therapeutic targets that might
help to negatively impact on metastasis dissemination and increasing patient
survival.

PMCID: PMC4008290
PMID: 24812525  [PubMed]


400. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Jun;145(3):593-604. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-2979-6.
Epub 2014 May 9.

Suppression of triple-negative breast cancer metastasis by pan-DAC inhibitor
panobinostat via inhibition of ZEB family of EMT master regulators.

Rhodes LV(1), Tate CR, Segar HC, Burks HE, Phamduy TB, Hoang V, Elliott S,
Gilliam D, Pounder FN, Anbalagan M, Chrisey DB, Rowan BG, Burow ME, Collins-Burow
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly aggressive breast cancer subtype
that lacks effective targeted therapies. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) is a key contributor in the metastatic process. We previously showed the
pan-deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 induces CDH1 expression in TNBC cells,
suggesting regulation of EMT. The purpose of this study was to examine the
effects of LBH589 on the metastatic qualities of TNBC cells and the role of EMT
in this process. A panel of breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and
BT-549), drugged with LBH589, was examined for changes in cell morphology,
migration, and invasion in vitro. The effect on in vivo metastasis was examined
using immunofluorescent staining of lung sections. EMT gene expression profiling 
was used to determine LBH589-induced changes in TNBC cells. ZEB overexpression
studies were conducted to validate requirement of ZEB in LBH589-mediated
proliferation and tumorigenesis. Our results indicate a reversal of EMT by LBH589
as demonstrated by altered morphology and altered gene expression in TNBC. LBH589
was shown to be a more potent inhibitor of EMT than other HDAC inhibitors, SAHA
and TMP269. Additionally, we found that LBH589 inhibits metastasis of MDA-MB-231 
cells in vivo. These effects of LBH589 were mediated in part by inhibition of
ZEB, as overexpression of ZEB1 or ZEB2 mitigated the effects of LBH589 on
MDA-MB-231 EMT-associated gene expression, migration, invasion, CDH1 expression, 
and tumorigenesis. These data indicate therapeutic potential of LBH589 in
targeting EMT and metastasis of TNBC.

PMCID: PMC4083690
PMID: 24810497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Chin J Integr Med. 2014 Oct;20(10):751-7. doi: 10.1007/s11655-014-1812-8. Epub
2014 May 6.

Xihuang Pill () induces mesenchymal-epithelial transition and inhibits loss of
apical-basal polarity in colorectal cancer cell through regulating ZEB1-SCRIB
loop.

Wang M(1), Meng JY, He SF.

Author information: 
(1)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 300193, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the antiproliferative and anti-metastasis effect of
Xihuang Pill (, XP) on human colorectal cancer cell and to explore the molecular 
mechanism by which it produces the effects.
METHODS: Highly metastatic human colorectal cancer cell line LoVo was treated
with low-, medium-, and highdose XP-containing serum (XP-L, XP-M, XP-H) groups
for 48 h, cells intervened with no drug rat serum and PD98059 [extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibitor] as negative and positive controls (NC
and PC) groups. Cell proliferation assay was made using cell counting kit-8
(CCK8). The 8 µm pore-size transwell chamber and 4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) staining were applied to examine the ability of invasion and migration of 
the cells. The protein expression of ERK1/2, zinc fifi nger E-box-binding
homeobox 1 (ZEB1), Scrib and lethal giant larvae homolog 2 (Lgl2) was detected by
Western blotting while the relative mRNA quantity of E-cadherin, N-cadherin,
Occludin and junctional adhesion molecule-1 (JAM1) was measured by realtime
fluorescent quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
RESULTS: XP induced a dose-dependent suppression on the proliferation of LoVo
cells (P <0.05 or P<0.01), with the inhibition rates varied from 27.30% to
31.08%. Transwell assay showed that when preprocessed with PD98059 and
XP-containing serum, the number of cells that passed the filter decreased
significantly compared with that of NC group (P <0.05 or P<0.01). Moreover, XP
inhibited the protein expression of ERK1/2 and ZEB1 (P <0.05); and up-regulated
the protein expression of Scrib and Lgl2 (P <0.05). The mRNA levels of
E-cadherin, Occludin and JAM1 of the XP intervened groups and PC group markedly
ascended (P <0.05) while that of N-cadherin showed a descending tendency
(P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: XP intervention suppressed the ability of proliferation, invasion and
migration of the LoVo cells. Regulating ZEB1-SCRIB Loop so as to recover
epithelial phenotype and apical junctional complex might be one of the mechanisms
by which XP produces the anti-metastasis effect.

PMID: 24802235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Ther. 2014 Aug;22(8):1494-503. doi: 10.1038/mt.2014.79. Epub 2014 May 5.

Therapeutic delivery of miR-200c enhances radiosensitivity in lung cancer.

Cortez MA(1), Valdecanas D(1), Zhang X(1), Zhan Y(2), Bhardwaj V(1), Calin GA(3),
Komaki R(4), Giri DK(5), Quini CC(6), Wolfe T(1), Peltier HJ(7), Bader AG(7),
Heymach JV(8), Meyn RE(1), Welsh JW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (2)Institute for Applied Cancer
Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. 
(3)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (5)Sipaumdi
Pathology Consultancy, Pearland, Texas, USA. (6)Department of Physics and
Biophysics, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Mirna Therapeutics, Inc., Austin, Texas, USA. (8)Department of Thoracic/Head
and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

The microRNA (miR)-200s and their negative regulator ZEB1 have been extensively
studied in the context of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Loss of miR-200s
has been shown to enhance cancer aggressiveness and metastasis, whereas
replacement of miR-200 miRNAs has been shown to inhibit cell growth in several
types of tumors, including lung cancer. Here, we reveal a novel function of
miR-200c, a member of the miR-200 family, in regulating intracellular reactive
oxygen species signaling and explore a potential application for its use in
combination with therapies known to increase oxidative stress such as radiation. 
We found that miR-200c overexpression increased cellular radiosensitivity by
direct regulation of the oxidative stress response genes PRDX2, GAPB/Nrf2, and
SESN1 in ways that inhibits DNA double-strand breaks repair, increase levels of
reactive oxygen species, and upregulate p21. We used a lung cancer xenograft
model to further demonstrate the therapeutic potential of systemic delivery of
miR-200c to enhance radiosensitivity in lung cancer. Our findings suggest that
the antitumor effects of miR-200c result partially from its regulation of the
oxidative stress response; they further suggest that miR-200c, in combination
with radiation, could represent a therapeutic strategy in the future.

PMCID: PMC4435581
PMID: 24791940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Vision Res. 2014 Jul;100:88-92. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2014.04.007. Epub 2014 Apr 
26.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 3 is associated with agenesis and
hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.

Jang MS(1), Roldan AN(1), Frausto RF(1), Aldave AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)The Jules Stein Eye
Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: aldave@jsei.ucla.edu.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) is a dominantly inherited
disorder of the corneal endothelium that has been associated with mutations in
the zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 gene (ZEB1) gene in approximately
one-third of affected families. While the corneal dystrophies have traditionally 
been considered isolated disorders of the corneal endothelium, we have recently
identified two cases of maldevelopment of the corpus callosum in unrelated
individuals with PPCD. The proband of the first family was diagnosed shortly
after birth with agenesis of the corpus callosum and several other developmental 
abnormalities. Karyotype, FISH and whole genome copy number variant analyses were
normal. She was subsequently diagnosed with PPCD, prompting screening of the ZEB1
gene, which identified a novel deletion (c.449delG; p.(Gly150Alafs*36)) present
in the heterozygous state that was not identified in either unaffected parent.
The proband of the second family was diagnosed several months after birth with
thinning of the corpus callosum and PPCD. Whole genome copy number variant
analysis revealed a 1.79 Mb duplication of 17q12 in the proband and her father
and brother, neither of whom had PPCD. ZEB1 sequencing identified a novel
deletion (c.1913-1914delCA; p.(Ser638Cysfs*5)) present in the heterozygous state,
which was also identified in the proband's affected mother. Thus, we report the
first two cases of the association of PPCD with a developmental abnormality of
the brain, in this case maldevelopment of the corpus callosum.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4074516
PMID: 24780443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. JAKSTAT. 2014 Jan 1;3(1):e28086. doi: 10.4161/jkst.28086. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

The involvement of JAK-STAT3 in cell motility, invasion, and metastasis.

Teng Y(1), Ross JL(1), Cowell JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Georgia Regents University Cancer Center; Augusta, GA USA.

JAK-STAT3 signaling, while regulating many aspects of cancer development and
progression, promotes invasion and metastasis through activation of key
metastasis promoting genes such as WASF3. STAT3 promotes WASF3 expression and
JAK2 independently activates it, which is required for invasion. JAK-STAT3
signaling is dependent on WASF3 function, since its inactivation in cells
expressing JAK-STAT3 suppresses invasion. WASF3 overexpression leads to
activation of NF<U+03BA>B and ZEB1 which also promote invasion through regulation of
target genes involved in metastasis. NF<U+03BA>B frequently cooperates with STAT3 to
upregulate metastasis promoting genes such as matrix metalloproteinases and
cytokines, as well as to suppress microRNAs which can suppresses invasion. This
better understanding of the complex role played by JAK-STAT3 in the regulation of
cell movement, invasion, and metastasis provides opportunities to suppress this
lethal aspect of cancer progression by not only targeting the JAK and STAT3
proteins directly, but also some of the downstream effectors of JAK-STAT3
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3995737
PMID: 24778926  [PubMed]


405. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Aug;21(8):1250-61. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.44. Epub 2014
Apr 25.

Identification of a ZEB2-MITF-ZEB1 transcriptional network that controls
melanogenesis and melanoma progression.

Denecker G(1), Vandamme N(1), Akay O(1), Koludrovic D(2), Taminau J(1), Lemeire
K(3), Gheldof A(1), De Craene B(1), Van Gele M(4), Brochez L(4), Udupi GM(5),
Rafferty M(6), Balint B(6), Gallagher WM(5), Ghanem G(7), Huylebroeck D(8), Haigh
J(9), van den Oord J(10), Larue L(11), Davidson I(2), Marine JC(12), Berx G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Unit of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Inflammation Research Center, VIB,
9052 Ghent, Belgium [2] Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent
University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium. (2)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch,
France. (3)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052
Ghent, Belgium. (4)Department of Dermatology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000
Ghent, Belgium. (5)1] UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, UCD
Conway Institute, University College, Dublin 4, Ireland [2] OncoMark Limited,
Nova UCD, Belfield Innovation Park, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin
4, Ireland. (6)OncoMark Limited, Nova UCD, Belfield Innovation Park, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. (7)Institute Jules Bordet, Brussels,
Belgium. (8)1] Laboratory of Molecular Biology (Celgen), Department of
Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] Department of
Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (9)1] Department of
Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium [2] Vascular 
Cell Biology Unit, Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, Ghent,
Belgium. (10)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Leuven, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. (11)Curie Institute, Developmental Genetics of Melanocytes,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR3347, Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1021, Orsay, France. (12)1] Center
for the Biology of Disease, Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, VIB, Leuven,
Belgium [2] Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Deregulation of signaling pathways that control differentiation, expansion and
migration of neural crest-derived melanoblasts during normal development
contributes also to melanoma progression and metastasis. Although several
epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) transcription factors, such as zinc finger E-box 
binding protein 1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2, have been implicated in neural crest cell
biology, little is known about their role in melanocyte homeostasis and melanoma.
Here we show that mice lacking Zeb2 in the melanocyte lineage exhibit a
melanoblast migration defect and, unexpectedly, a severe melanocyte
differentiation defect. Loss of Zeb2 in the melanocyte lineage results in a
downregulation of the Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (Mitf) and
melanocyte differentiation markers concomitant with an upregulation of Zeb1. We
identify a transcriptional signaling network in which the EMT transcription
factor ZEB2 regulates MITF levels to control melanocyte differentiation.
Moreover, our data are also relevant for human melanomagenesis as loss of ZEB2
expression is associated with reduced patient survival.

PMCID: PMC4085532
PMID: 24769727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer Cell. 2014 May 12;25(5):666-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.010. Epub 2014 
Apr 24.

A long noncoding RNA activated by TGF-ß promotes the invasion-metastasis cascade 
in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yuan JH(1), Yang F(1), Wang F(1), Ma JZ(1), Guo YJ(1), Tao QF(2), Liu F(1), Pan
W(1), Wang TT(1), Zhou CC(1), Wang SB(1), Wang YZ(1), Yang Y(2), Yang N(3), Zhou 
WP(2), Yang GS(3), Sun SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
200433, China. (2)The Third Department of Hepatic Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary 
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (3)The
Fifth Department of Hepatic Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (4)Department of Medical
Genetics, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 200433, China. Electronic
address: shsun@vip.sina.com.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 May 12;25(5):557-9.
    Hepatology. 2015 Feb;61(2):722-4.

The role of TGF-ß-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer cell 
dissemination is well established, but the involvement of lncRNAs in TGF-ß
signaling is still unknown. In this study, we observed that the lncRNA-activated 
by TGF-ß (lncRNA-ATB) was upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
metastases and associated with poor prognosis. lncRNA-ATB upregulated ZEB1 and
ZEB2 by competitively binding the miR-200 family and then induced EMT and
invasion. In addition, lncRNA-ATB promoted organ colonization of disseminated
tumor cells by binding IL-11 mRNA, autocrine induction of IL-11, and triggering
STAT3 signaling. Globally, lncRNA-ATB promotes the invasion-metastasis cascade.
Thus, these findings suggest that lncRNA-ATB, a mediator of TGF-ß signaling,
could predispose HCC patients to metastases and may serve as a potential target
for antimetastatic therapies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24768205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 24;9(4):e96175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096175. eCollection
2014.

Identification of novel regulatory genes in development of the avian reproductive
tracts.

Lim W(1), Song G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The chicken reproductive system is unique in maintaining its functions including 
production of eggs or sperm, fertilization of the egg by sperm maintained in
sperm nests, production of hormones regulating its growth, development and
function, and reproduction. Development of the reproductive organs is a highly
regulated process that results in differentiation and proliferation of germ cells
in response to predominant regulatory factors such as hormones and transcription 
factors. However, only a few genes are known to determine morphogenesis of the
chicken reproductive tract and their mechanisms are unknown. Therefore, in the
present study, we investigated the expression patterns of four genes including
SNCA, TOM1L1, TTR and ZEB1 in the gonads at embryonic days 14 and 18, and in
immature (12-week-old) and mature (50-week-old) chickens, as well as the
reproductive tract including ovary, oviduct and testes of the respective sexes by
qRT-PCR, in situ hybridization and immunofluorescence analyses. The expression of
SNCA, TOM1L1 and ZEB1 genes was higher in immature and mature female reproductive
tracts than expression of TTR. In addition, different temporal and spatial
patterns of expression of the four genes were observed during maturation of
testis in chickens. Specifically, SNCA, TOM1L1 and TTR were highly expressed in
testes of 12-week-old chickens. Moreover, several chicken specific microRNAs
(miRs) were demonstrated to affect expression of target gene mRNAs by directly
binding to the 3'-UTR of their target genes through actions at the
post-transcriptional level as follows: miR-153 and miR-1643 for SNCA; miR-1680*
for TTR; and miR-200b and miR-1786 for ZEB1. These results suggest that
four-selected genes play an important role in development of the male and female 
reproductive tract in chickens and expression of most candidate genes is
regulated at the post-transcriptional level through specific microRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3999111
PMID: 24763497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jun;124(6):2696-708. doi: 10.1172/JCI72171. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

ZEB1 sensitizes lung adenocarcinoma to metastasis suppression by PI3K antagonism.

Yang Y, Ahn YH, Chen Y, Tan X, Guo L, Gibbons DL, Ungewiss C, Peng DH, Liu X, Lin
SH, Thilaganathan N, Wistuba II, Rodriguez-Canales J, McLendon G, Creighton CJ,
Kurie JM.

Epithelial tumor cells that have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) are typically prone to metastasis and drug resistance and contribute to a
poor clinical outcome. The transcription factor ZEB1 is a known driver of EMT,
and mediators of ZEB1 represent potential therapeutic targets for metastasis
suppression. Here, we have shown that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-targeted
(PI3K-targeted) therapy suppresses metastasis in a mouse model of
Kras/Tp53-mutant lung adenocarcinoma that develops metastatic disease due to high
expression of ZEB1. In lung adenocarcinoma cells from Kras/Tp53-mutant animals
and human lung cancer cell lines, ZEB1 activated PI3K by derepressing miR-200
targets, including amphiregulin (AREG), betacellulin (BTC), and the transcription
factor GATA6, which stimulated an EGFR/ERBB2 autocrine loop. Additionally,
ZEB1-dependent derepression of the miR-200 and miR-183 target friend of GATA 2
(FOG2) enhanced GATA3-induced expression of the p110a catalytic subunit of PI3K. 
Knockdown of FOG2, p110a, and RHEB ameliorated invasive and metastatic
propensities of tumor cells. Surprisingly, FOG2 was not required for mesenchymal 
differentiation, suggesting that mesenchymal differentiation and invasion are
distinct and separable processes. Together, these results indicate that ZEB1
sensitizes lung adenocarcinoma cells to metastasis suppression by PI3K-targeted
therapy and suggest that treatments to selectively modify the metastatic behavior
of mesenchymal tumor cells are feasible and may be of clinical value.

PMCID: PMC4038569
PMID: 24762440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jun;124(6):2611-25. doi: 10.1172/JCI69815. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Mesenchymal gene program-expressing ovarian cancer spheroids exhibit enhanced
mesothelial clearance.

Davidowitz RA, Selfors LM, Iwanicki MP, Elias KM, Karst A, Piao H, Ince TA, Drage
MG, Dering J, Konecny GE, Matulonis U, Mills GB, Slamon DJ, Drapkin R, Brugge JS.

Metastatic dissemination of ovarian tumors involves the invasion of tumor cell
clusters into the mesothelial cell lining of peritoneal cavity organs; however,
the tumor-specific factors that allow ovarian cancer cells to spread are unclear.
We used an in vitro assay that models the initial step of ovarian cancer
metastasis, clearance of the mesothelial cell layer, to examine the clearance
ability of a large panel of both established and primary ovarian tumor cells.
Comparison of the gene and protein expression profiles of clearance-competent and
clearance-incompetent cells revealed that mesenchymal genes are enriched in tumor
populations that display strong clearance activity, while epithelial genes are
enriched in those with weak or undetectable activity. Overexpression of
transcription factors SNAI1, TWIST1, and ZEB1, which regulate the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), promoted mesothelial clearance in
cell lines with weak activity, while knockdown of the EMT-regulatory
transcription factors TWIST1 and ZEB1 attenuated mesothelial clearance in ovarian
cancer cell lines with strong activity. These findings provide important insights
into the mechanisms associated with metastatic progression of ovarian cancer and 
suggest that inhibiting pathways that drive mesenchymal programs may suppress
tumor cell invasion of peritoneal tissues.

PMCID: PMC4038562
PMID: 24762435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 23;9(4):e94621. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094621. eCollection
2014.

Evaluation of cancer stem cell markers CD133, CD44, CD24: association with AKT
isoforms and radiation resistance in colon cancer cells.

Sahlberg SH(1), Spiegelberg D(1), Glimelius B(2), Stenerlöw B(1), Nestor M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biomedical Radiation Sciences, Department of Radiology, Oncology
and Radiation Science, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Section of Oncology, Department of Radiology, Oncology and Radiation Science, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Section of Biomedical Radiation Sciences,
Department of Radiology, Oncology and Radiation Science, Rudbeck Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; Section of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck 
Surgery, Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden;
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

The cell surface proteins CD133, CD24 and CD44 are putative markers for cancer
stem cell populations in colon cancer, associated with aggressive cancer types
and poor prognosis. It is important to understand how these markers may predict
treatment outcomes, determined by factors such as radioresistance. The scope of
this study was to assess the connection between EGFR, CD133, CD24, and CD44
(including isoforms) expression levels and radiation sensitivity, and furthermore
analyze the influence of AKT isoforms on the expression patterns of these
markers, to better understand the underlying molecular mechanisms in the cell.
Three colon cancer cell-lines were used, HT-29, DLD-1, and HCT116, together with 
DLD-1 isogenic AKT knock-out cell-lines. All three cell-lines (HT-29, HCT116 and 
DLD-1) expressed varying amounts of CD133, CD24 and CD44 and the top ten percent 
of CD133 and CD44 expressing cells (CD133high/CD44high) were more resistant to
gamma radiation than the ten percent with lowest expression (CD133low/CD44low).
The AKT expression was lower in the fraction of cells with low CD133/CD44.
Depletion of AKT1 or AKT2 using knock out cells showed for the first time that
CD133 expression was associated with AKT1 but not AKT2, whereas the CD44
expression was influenced by the presence of either AKT1 or AKT2. There were
several genes in the cell adhesion pathway which had significantly higher
expression in the AKT2 KO cell-line compared to the AKT1 KO cell-line; however
important genes in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition pathway (CDH1, VIM,
TWIST1, SNAI1, SNAI2, ZEB1, ZEB2, FN1, FOXC2 and CDH2) did not differ. Our
results demonstrate that CD133high/CD44high expressing colon cancer cells are
associated with AKT and increased radiation resistance, and that different AKT
isoforms have varying effects on the expression of cancer stem cell markers,
which is an important consideration when targeting AKT in a clinical setting.

PMCID: PMC3997403
PMID: 24760019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Jul;15(7):878-87. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28877. Epub 2014 Apr
22.

Downregulation of GRHL2 inhibits the proliferation of colorectal cancer cells by 
targeting ZEB1.

Quan Y(1), Jin R(2), Huang A(3), Zhao H(3), Feng B(2), Zang L(2), Zheng M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; Ruijin Hospital; Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine; Shanghai, PR China; Shanghai Institute of Digestive Surgery;
Shanghai, PR China. (2)Department of Surgery; Ruijin Hospital; Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine; Shanghai, PR China. (3)Shanghai Institute of
Digestive Surgery; Shanghai, PR China. (4)Department of Surgery; Ruijin Hospital;
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine; Shanghai, PR China; Shanghai
Minhang District Central Hospital; Shanghai, PR China.

Previous reports have associated GRHL2 with tumor progression. However, the
biological role of GRHL2 in human colorectal cancer (CRC) has not been explored. 
We examined the expression of GRHL2 in 75 CRC samples, as well as the paired
non-tumor tissues, by immunohistochemistry, qRT-PCR, and western blot analysis.
The association between GRHL2 expression and various clinicopathological
parameters including Ki-67, a marker of proliferative activity, was also
evaluated. We performed lentivirus-mediated shRNA transfection to knock down
GRHL2 gene expression in HT29 and HCT116 CRC cells. Cell proliferation was
examined by the CCK-8 (Cell Counting Kit-8) assay, colony formation, and cell
cycle assay in vitro. Tumorigenesis in vivo was assessed using a mouse xenograft 
model. Moreover, we transiently silenced ZEB1 expression in GRHL2-knockdown CRC
cells using specific shRNA, and then examined the effects on GRHL2 and E-cadherin
expression, as well as cell proliferation. Herein, we demonstrated that enhanced 
GRHL2 expression was detected in CRC, and correlated with higher levels of Ki-67 
staining, larger tumor size, and advanced clinical stage. Knocking down GRHL2 in 
HT29 and HCT116 CRC cells significantly inhibited cell proliferation by
decreasing the number of cells in S phase and increasing that in the G 0/G 1
phaseof the cell cycle. This resulted in inhibition of tumorigenesis in vivo, as 
well as increased expression of ZEB1. Furthermore, transient ZEB1 knockdown
dramatically enhanced cell proliferation and increased GRHL2 and E-cadherin
expression. Collectively, our study has identified ZEB1 as a target of GRHL2 and 
suggested a reciprocal GRHL2-ZEB1 repressive relationship, providing a novel
mechanism through which proliferation may be modulated in CRC cells.

PMCID: PMC4100988
PMID: 24756066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Oncogene. 2015 Mar 26;34(13):1709-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.97. Epub 2014 Apr 21.

Ubiquilin1 represses migration and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of human 
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Shah PP(1), Lockwood WW(2), Saurabh K(1), Kurlawala Z(3), Shannon SP(1), Waigel
S(1), Zacharias W(4), Beverly LJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY,
USA. (2)Cancer Biology and Genetics Section, Cancer Genetics Branch, National
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA. (3)1] James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, USA [2] Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of 
Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA. (4)1] James Graham Brown
Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA [2] Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, KY, USA [3] Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA.

Ubiquilin1 (UBQLN1) is a ubiquitin-like domain and a ubiquitin-associated domain 
containing protein that has been reported to be involved in shuttling proteins to
the proteasome, especially during endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein
degradation. Thus, UBQLN1 function has been shown to be critical for combating a 
number of neurological disorders caused by protein aggregation, such as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease. A
role for UBQLN1 in regulating processes involved in tumorigenesis has not been
demonstrated. Herein, we show that loss of UBQLN1 causes increased cell migration
and invasion, actin cytoskeleton reorganization and induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Loss of UBQLN1 results in a
significant decrease in the expression of epithelial markers including E-cadherin
and claudin1, whereas expression of mesenchymal markers including Vimentin, Snail
and ZEB1 are significantly elevated. Interestingly, we found that ZEB1 is
required for induction of mesenchymal-like properties following loss of UBQLN1
and ZEB1 is capable of repressing expression of UBQLN1, suggesting a
physiological, reciprocal regulation of EMT by UBQLN1 and ZEB1. Further, we find 
evidence for a role for UBQLN2 in also regulating EMT and cell migration. These
observations have potential clinical relevance because the UBQLN1 gene is lost
and underexpressed in a large percentage of human cancer cell lines, and primary 
human lung cancer samples and recurrent mutations in all five UBQLN family
members have been identified in human lung cancers. Taken together, our results
suggest for the first time a role for UBQLN family members in cancer biology.

PMCID: PMC4205225
PMID: 24747970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Dev Cell. 2014 Apr 14;29(1):47-58. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.005.

Transcriptional mechanisms link epithelial plasticity to adhesion and
differentiation of epidermal progenitor cells.

Lee B(1), Villarreal-Ponce A(1), Fallahi M(1), Ovadia J(2), Sun P(1), Yu QC(3),
Ito S(4), Sinha S(5), Nie Q(2), Dai X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine CA 92697, USA. (2)Department of Mathematics,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine CA 92697, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA. (4)Department of Medical Chemistry, Kansai Medical University,
Moriguchi 570-8506, Japan. (5)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New
York, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA. (6)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of
Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine CA 92697, USA. Electronic
address: xdai@uci.edu.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Apr 14;29(1):1-2.

During epithelial tissue morphogenesis, developmental progenitor cells undergo
dynamic adhesive and cytoskeletal remodeling to trigger proliferation and
migration. Transcriptional mechanisms that restrict such a mild form of
epithelial plasticity to maintain lineage-restricted differentiation in committed
epithelial tissues are poorly understood. Here, we report that simultaneous
ablation of transcriptional repressor-encoding Ovol1 and Ovol2 results in
expansion and blocked terminal differentiation of embryonic epidermal progenitor 
cells. Conversely, mice overexpressing Ovol2 in their skin epithelia exhibit
precocious differentiation accompanied by smaller progenitor cell compartments.
We show that Ovol1/Ovol2-deficient epidermal cells fail to undertake
a-catenin-driven actin cytoskeletal reorganization and adhesive maturation and
exhibit changes that resemble epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Remarkably, these alterations and defective terminal differentiation are reversed
upon depletion of EMT-promoting transcriptional factor Zeb1. Collectively, our
findings reveal Ovol-Zeb1-a-catenin sequential repression and highlight Ovol1 and
Ovol2 as gatekeepers of epithelial adhesion and differentiation by inhibiting
progenitor-like traits and epithelial plasticity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4153751
PMID: 24735878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 14;9(4):e94793. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094793. eCollection
2014.

Role of Rip2 in development of tumor-infiltrating MDSCs and bladder cancer
metastasis.

Zhang H(1), Chin AI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Broad Stem Cell Research Center, Jonsson Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America.

Tumor invasion and metastases represent a complex series of molecular events that
portends a poor prognosis. The contribution of inflammatory pathways mediating
this process is not well understood. Nod-like receptors (NLRs) of innate immunity
function as intracellular sensors of pathogen motifs and danger molecules. We
propose a role of NLRs in tumor surveillance and in programming
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). In this study, we examined the downstream 
serine/threonine and tyrosine kinase Rip2 in a murine model of bladder cancer. In
Rip2-deficient C57Bl6 mice, larger orthotopic MB49 tumors developed with more
numerous and higher incidence of metastases compared to wild-type controls. As
such, increased tumor infiltration of CD11b+ Gr1hi myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs) with concomitant decrease in T cells and NK cells were observed in 
Rip2-deficient tumor bearing animals using orthotopic and subcutaneous tumor
models. Rip2-deficient tumors showed enhanced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, with elevated expression of zeb1, zeb2, twist, and snail in the tumor
microenvironment. We found that the absence of Rip2 plays an intrinsic role in
fostering the development of granulocytic MDSCs by an autocrine and paracrine
effect of granulocytic colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) expression. Our findings
suggest that NLR pathways may be a novel modality to program TILs and influence
tumor metastases.

PMCID: PMC3986223
PMID: 24733360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Oncol. 2014 Jul;8(5):942-55. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.03.014. Epub 2014 Mar
25.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 modulates invasion and metastatic potential of
colorectal cancer cells.

David M(1), Naudin C(2), Letourneur M(1), Polrot M(3), Renoir JM(1), Lazar V(4), 
Dessen P(4), Roche S(2), Bertoglio J(1), Pierre J(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U749, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39, Rue Camille Desmoulins, 94800
Villejuif, France. (2)CNRS UMR5237, CRBM, 1919 route de Mende, Montpellier,
France. (3)Preclinical Evaluation Platform (PFEP), Institut Gustave Roussy, 39,
Rue Camille Desmoulins, 94800 Villejuif, France. (4)Genomic Unit, Institut
Gustave Roussy, 39, Rue Camille Desmoulins, 94800 Villejuif, France. (5)INSERM
U749, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39, Rue Camille Desmoulins, 94800 Villejuif,
France. Electronic address: josiane.pierre@gustaveroussy.fr.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) 1 is an inducible negative regulator of
cytokine signaling but its role in human cancer is not completely established.
Here we report that, while SOCS1 is expressed in normal colonic epithelium and
colon adenocarcinomas, its level decreases during progression of colon
adenocarcinomas, the lowest level being found in the most aggressive stage and
least differentiated carcinomas. Forced expression of SOCS1 in metastatic
colorectal SW620 cells reverses many characteristics of Epithelial-Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT), as highlighted by the disappearance of the transcription factor
ZEB1 and the mesenchymal form of p120ctn and the re-expression of E-cadherin.
Furthermore, miRNA profiling indicated that SOCS1 also up-regulates the
expression of the mir-200 family of miRNAs, which can promote the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition and reduce tumor cell migration. Accordingly,
overexpression of SOCS1 induced cell morphology changes and dramatically reduced 
tumor cell invasion in vitro. When injected in nude mice, SOCS1-expressing SW620 
cells induced metastases in a smaller number of animals than parental SW620
cells, and did not generate any adrenal gland or bone metastasis. Overall, our
results suggest that SOCS1 controls metastatic progression of colorectal tumors
by preventing the mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), including E-cadherin
expression. This pathway may be associated with survival to colorectal cancer by 
reducing the capacity of generating metastases.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cancer Genet. 2014 Mar;207(3):75-82. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.02.008. Epub
2014 Feb 27.

Down-regulation of FoxM1 leads to the inhibition of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in gastric cancer cells.

Miao L(1), Xiong X(1), Lin Y(1), Cheng Y(1), Lu J(1), Zhang J(1), Cheng N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bile Duct Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China. (2)Department of Bile Duct Surgery, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China. Electronic
address: chengnansheng2013@163.com.

Emerging evidence suggests that FoxM1 may have a crucial role in the development 
and progression of human gastric cancer. Therefore, we sought to determine the
role of FoxM1 in gastric cancer epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The
down-regulation of FoxM1 expression by the transfection of cells with FoxM1 siRNA
decreased cell migration, invasion, and proliferation. Moreover, the
over-expression of FoxM1 promoted cell migration, invasion, and proliferation,
which led to the acquisition of an EMT phenotype by up-regulating the protein
expression of the mesenchymal cell markers ZEB1, ZEB2, and vimentin and by
down-regulating the epithelial cell marker E-cadherin in gastric epithelial
cells. More important, the depletion of FoxM1 levels in gastric cancer cells led 
to significant decreases in the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit, cyclin D1, Hes-1, VEGF, and
EpCAM protein levels. Real-time PCR examination showed that the down-regulation
of FoxM1 expression significantly inhibited vimentin and N-cadherin expression
compared to that in control cells. Most important, cells transfected with FoxM1
siRNA displayed an elongated/irregular fibroblastoid morphology and reduction of 
the vimentin expression. Our current study strongly suggests that FoxM1 signaling
has important roles in tumor cell aggressiveness through the acquisition of the
EMT phenotype in gastric cancer cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2014 Apr;34(2):201-6. doi:
10.1007/s11596-014-1259-3. Epub 2014 Apr 8.

miR-200c inhibits metastasis of breast cancer cells by targeting HMGB1.

Chang BP(1), Wang DS, Xing JW, Yang SH, Chu Q, Yu SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China, cbply2908@126.com.

miR-200c has been shown to regulate the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
by inhibiting ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression in breast cancer cells. This study further
examined the role of miR-200c in the invasion and metastasis of breast cancer
that goes beyond the regulation on ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression. In this study, the
bioinformatics software (miRanda) was used to predict the target gene of miR-200c
and Renilla luciferase assay to verify the result. The metastatic breast cancer
cells MDA-MB-231 were cultured and transfected with the miR-200c mimic or
inhibitor. The expressions of miR-200c and HMGB1 were detected by RT-PCR and
Western blotting, respectively. Transwell assay and wound healing assay were
employed to examine the invasive and migrating ability of transfected cells.
Target prediction and Renilla luciferase analysis revealed that HMGB1 was a
putative target gene of miR-200c. After transfection of MDA-MB-231 cells with the
miR-200c mimic or inhibitor, the expression of miR-200c was significantly
increased or decreased when compared with cells transfected with the miR-200c
mimic NC or inhibitor NC. Moreover, the expression of HMGB1 was reversely
correlated with that of miR-200c in transfected cells. Tranwell assay showed that
the number of invasive cells was significantly reduced in miR-200c mimic group
when compared with miR-200c inhibitor group. It was also found that the migrating
ability of cells transfected with miR-200c mimics was much lower than that of
cells transfected with miR-200c inhibitors. It was suggested that miR-200c can
suppress the invasion and migration of breast cancer cells by regulating the
expression of HMGB1. miR-200c and HMGB1 may become useful biomarkers for
progression of breast cancer and targets of gene therapy.

PMID: 24710933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 2;9(4):e92161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092161. eCollection 
2014.

Embelin suppresses growth of human pancreatic cancer xenografts, and pancreatic
cancer cells isolated from KrasG12D mice by inhibiting Akt and Sonic hedgehog
pathways.

Huang M(1), Tang SN(1), Upadhyay G(1), Marsh JL(2), Jackman CP(2), Shankar S(3), 
Srivastava RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Texas Health Science Center at Tyler, Tyler, Texas, United States
of America. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of
Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
Kansas, United States of America.

Pancreatic cancer is a deadly disease, and therefore effective treatment and/or
prevention strategies are urgently needed. The objectives of this study were to
examine the molecular mechanisms by which embelin inhibited human pancreatic
cancer cell growth in vitro, and xenografts in Balb C nude mice, and pancreatic
cancer cell growth isolated from KrasG12D transgenic mice. XTT assays were
performed to measure cell viability. AsPC-1 cells were injected subcutaneously
into Balb c nude mice and treated with embelin. Cell proliferation and apoptosis 
were measured by Ki67 and TUNEL staining, respectively. The expression of Akt,
and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and their target gene products were measured by the
immunohistochemistry, and Western blot analysis. The effects of embelin on
pancreatic cancer cells isolated from 10-months old KrasG12D mice were also
examined. Embelin inhibited cell viability in pancreatic cancer AsPC-1, PANC-1,
MIA PaCa-2 and Hs 766T cell lines, and these inhibitory effects were blocked
either by constitutively active Akt or Shh protein. Embelin-treated mice showed
significant inhibition in tumor growth which was associated with reduced
expression of markers of cell proliferation (Ki67, PCNA and Bcl-2) and cell cycle
(cyclin D1, CDK2, and CDK6), and induction of apoptosis (activation of caspase-3 
and cleavage of PARP, and increased expression of Bax). In addition, embelin
inhibited the expression of markers of angiogenesis (COX-2, VEGF, VEGFR, and
IL-8), and metastasis (MMP-2 and MMP-9) in tumor tissues. Antitumor activity of
embelin was associated with inhibition of Akt and Shh pathways in xenografts, and
pancreatic cancer cells isolated from KrasG12D mice. Furthermore, embelin also
inhibited epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by up-regulating E-cadherin 
and inhibiting the expression of Snail, Slug, and ZEB1. These data suggest that
embelin can inhibit pancreatic cancer growth, angiogenesis and metastasis by
suppressing Akt and Shh pathways, and can be developed for the treatment and/or
prevention of pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3973629
PMID: 24694877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Curr Mol Med. 2014 May;14(4):523-34.

Blockade of Jagged/Notch pathway abrogates transforming growth factor ß2-induced 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human retinal pigment epithelium cells.

Chen X, Xiao W, Liu X, Zeng M, Luo L, Wu M, Ye S, Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510060, People's Republic of China.
yizhi_liu@yahoo.cn.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
cells plays a key role in proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) and proliferative
diabetic retinopathy (PDR), which lead to the loss of vision. The Jagged/Notch
pathway has been reported to be essential in EMT during embryonic development,
fibrotic diseases and cancer metastasis. However, the function of Jagged/Notch
signaling in EMT of RPE cells is unknown. Thus, we hypothesized that a crosstalk 
between Notch and transforming growth factor ß2 (TGF-ß2) signaling could induce
EMT in RPE cells, which subsequently contributes to PVR and PDR. Here, we
demonstrate that Jagged-1/Notch pathway is involved in the TGF-ß2-mediated EMT of
human RPE cells. Blockade of Notch pathway with DAPT (a specific inhibitor of
Notch receptor cleavage) and knockdown of Jagged-1 expression inhibited
TGF-ß2-induced EMT through regulating the expression of Snail, Slug and ZEB1.
Besides the canonical Smad signaling pathway, the noncanonical PI3K/Akt and MAPK 
pathway also contributed to TGF-ß2-induced up-regulation of Jagged-1 in RPE
cells. Overexpression of Jagged-1 could mimic TGF-ß2 induce EMT. Our data suggest
that the Jagged-1/Notch signaling pathway plays a critical role in TGF-ß2-induced
EMT in human RPE cells, and may contribute to the development of PVR and PDR.
Inhibition of the Jagged/Notch signaling pathway, therefore, may have therapeutic
value in the prevention and treatment of PVR and PDR.

PMID: 24694299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Clin Invest. 2014 May;124(5):2172-87. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Excess PLAC8 promotes an unconventional ERK2-dependent EMT in colon cancer.

Li C, Ma H, Wang Y, Cao Z, Graves-Deal R, Powell AE, Starchenko A, Ayers GD,
Washington MK, Kamath V, Desai K, Gerdes MJ, Solnica-Krezel L, Coffey RJ.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) transcriptional program is
characterized by repression of E-cadherin (CDH1) and induction of N-cadherin
(CDH2), and mesenchymal genes like vimentin (VIM). Placenta-specific 8 (PLAC8)
has been implicated in colon cancer; however, how PLAC8 contributes to disease is
unknown, and endogenous PLAC8 protein has not been studied. We analyzed zebrafish
and human tissues and found that endogenous PLAC8 localizes to the apical domain 
of differentiated intestinal epithelium. Colon cancer cells with elevated PLAC8
levels exhibited EMT features, including increased expression of VIM and zinc
finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), aberrant cell motility, and increased
invasiveness. In contrast to classical EMT, PLAC8 overexpression reduced cell
surface CDH1 and upregulated P-cadherin (CDH3) without affecting CDH2 expression.
PLAC8-induced EMT was linked to increased phosphorylated ERK2 (p-ERK2), and ERK2 
knockdown restored cell surface CDH1 and suppressed CDH3, VIM, and ZEB1
upregulation. In vitro, PLAC8 directly bound and inactivated the ERK2 phosphatase
DUSP6, thereby increasing p-ERK2. In a murine xenograft model, knockdown of
endogenous PLAC8 in colon cancer cells resulted in smaller tumors, reduced local 
invasion, and decreased p-ERK2. Using MultiOmyx, a multiplex
immunofluorescence-based methodology, we observed coexpression of cytosolic
PLAC8, CDH3, and VIM at the leading edge of a human colorectal tumor, supporting 
a role for PLAC8 in cancer invasion in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4001536
PMID: 24691442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Oncol Rep. 2014 May;31(5):2021-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3106. Epub 2014 Mar 21.

MiR-101 suppresses the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition by targeting ZEB1 and
ZEB2 in ovarian carcinoma.

Guo F(1), Cogdell D(1), Hu L(1), Yang D(1), Sood AK(2), Xue F(3), Zhang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive
Medicine, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tianjin Medical University
General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, P.R. China.

Ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy; the majority of
patients succumb to the disease within 5 years of diagnosis. The poor survival
rate is attributed to diagnosis at advanced stage, when the tumor has
metastasized. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a necessary step 
toward metastatic tumor progression. Through integrated computational analysis,
we recently identified a master microRNA (miRNA) network that includes miR-101
and regulates EMT in ovarian carcinoma. In the present study, we characterized
the functions of miR-101. Using reporter gene assays, we demonstrated that
miR-101 suppressed the expression of the E-cadherin repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2 by
directly targeting the 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR) of both ZEB1 and ZEB2.
Introduction of miR-101 significantly inhibited EMT and cell migration and
invasion. Introducing cDNAs of ZEB1 and ZEB2 without 3'UTR abrogated
miR-101-induced EMT alteration, respectively. Our findings showed that miR-101
represents a redundant mechanism for the miR-200 family that regulates EMT
through two major E-cadherin transcriptional repressors.

PMCID: PMC4020617
PMID: 24677166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Oncogene. 2015 Feb 26;34(9):1185-95. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.54. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

Basonuclin-1 modulates epithelial plasticity and TGF-ß1-induced loss of
epithelial cell integrity.

Feuerborn A(1), Mathow D(1), Srivastava PK(2), Gretz N(3), Gröne HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Centre 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Physiological Genomics and Medicine, MRC Clinical
Sciences, Imperial College, London, UK. (3)Department of Medical Research,
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Research Centre (ZMF), University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany.

Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) is a multifunctional cytokine and
critically involved in the progression of a variety of cancers. TGF-ß1 signaling 
can impair tumor development by its anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
features. In contrast, it may actively promote tumor progression and cancer cell 
dissemination by inducing a gradual switch from epithelial towards
mesenchymal-like cell features (EMT-like), including decreased intercellular
adhesion. Here, we show that expression of the transcription factor Basonuclin-1 
(Bnc1) modulates TGF-ß1-induced epithelial dedifferentiation of mammary
epithelial cells. RNAi-mediated repression of Bnc1 resulted in enhanced
intercellular adhesion and strongly impaired TGF-ß1-dependent sheet
disintegration and cell scattering. In contrast, forced expression of Bnc1
modifies plasma membrane/cytoskeletal dynamics and seemingly interferes with the 
initiation of sustainable cell-cell contacts. Follow-up analyses revealed that
Bnc1 affects the expression of numerous TGF-ß1-responsive genes including
distinct EMT-related transcription factors, some of which modulate the expression
of Bnc1 themselves. These results suggest that Bnc1 is part of a transcription
factor network related to epithelial plasticity with reciprocal feedback-loop
connections on which Smad-factors integrate TGF-ß1 signaling. Our study
demonstrates that Bnc1 regulates epithelial plasticity of mammary epithelial
cells and influences outcome of TGF-ß1 signaling.

PMID: 24662832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 May;13(5):1270-84. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0775. Epub
2014 Mar 21.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition mediates docetaxel resistance and high risk 
of relapse in prostate cancer.

Marín-Aguilera M(1), Codony-Servat J, Reig Ò, Lozano JJ, Fernández PL, Pereira
MV, Jiménez N, Donovan M, Puig P, Mengual L, Bermudo R, Font A, Gallardo E, Ribal
MJ, Alcaraz A, Gascón P, Mellado B.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Laboratory of Translational Oncology and Medical
Oncology Department; Bioinformatics Platform Department, Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red-Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Hospital Clínic;
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS); Laboratory
and Department of Urology, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona; Department of Pathology,
Hospital Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona; Althia; Tumor Bank, Hospital
Clínic-IDIBAPS Biobank, Barcelona; Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Germans 
Trias i Pujol, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Badalona; and Medical Oncology
Department, Hospital Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain.

Molecular characterization of radical prostatectomy specimens after systemic
therapy may identify a gene expression profile for resistance to therapy. This
study assessed tumor cells from patients with prostate cancer participating in a 
phase II neoadjuvant docetaxel and androgen deprivation trial to identify
mediators of resistance. Transcriptional level of 93 genes from a
docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines microarray study was analyzed by
TaqMan low-density arrays in tumors from patients with high-risk localized
prostate cancer (36 surgically treated, 28 with neoadjuvant docetaxel + androgen 
deprivation). Gene expression was compared between groups and correlated with
clinical outcome. VIM, AR and RELA were validated by immunohistochemistry. CD44
and ZEB1 expression was tested by immunofluorescence in cells and tumor samples. 
Parental and docetaxel-resistant castration-resistant prostate cancer cell lines 
were tested for epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers before and
after docetaxel exposure. Reversion of EMT phenotype was investigated as a
docetaxel resistance reversion strategy. Expression of 63 (67.7%) genes differed 
between groups (P < 0.05), including genes related to androgen receptor, NF-<U+03BA>B
transcription factor, and EMT. Increased expression of EMT markers correlated
with radiologic relapse. Docetaxel-resistant cells had increased EMT and
stem-like cell markers expression. ZEB1 siRNA transfection reverted docetaxel
resistance and reduced CD44 expression in DU-145R and PC-3R. Before docetaxel
exposure, a selected CD44(+) subpopulation of PC-3 cells exhibited EMT phenotype 
and intrinsic docetaxel resistance; ZEB1/CD44(+) subpopulations were found in
tumor cell lines and primary tumors; this correlated with aggressive clinical
behavior. This study identifies genes potentially related to chemotherapy
resistance and supports evidence of the EMT role in docetaxel resistance and
adverse clinical behavior in early prostate cancer.

PMID: 24659820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Apr 28;52(3):289-300. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0051. Print 2014
Jun.

ABCG2/BCRP gene expression is related to epithelial-mesenchymal transition
inducer genes in a papillary thyroid carcinoma cell line (TPC-1).

Mato E(1), González C, Moral A, Pérez JI, Bell O, Lerma E, de Leiva A.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Neoplasia Study Group, EDUAB-HSP, Biomedical Research Networking
Center in Bioengineering, Biomaterials and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN) Departament
de Biologia Cel-lular, Immunologia i Neurociències, Facultat de Medicina,
Universitat de Barcelona, Spain Departments of Endocrinology and Nutrition
General Surgery Pathology IIB, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau- Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Tumor malignancy is associated with the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
process and resistance to chemotherapy. However, little is known about the
relationship between the EMT and the multidrug-resistance gene in thyroid tumor
progression. We investigated whether the expression of the ABCG2/BCRP gene is
associated with ZEB1 and other EMT inducer genes involved in tumor
dedifferentiation. We established a subpopulation of cells that express the
ABCG2/BCRP gene derived from the thyroid papillary carcinoma cell line (TPC-1),
the so-called TPC-1 MITO-resistant subline. The most relevant findings in these
TPC-1 selected cells were a statistically significant upregulation of ZEB1 and
TWIST1 (35- and 15-fold change respectively), no changes in the relative
expression of vimentin and SNAIL1, and no expression of E-cadherin. The TPC-1
MITO-resistant subline displayed a faster migration and greater invasive ability 
than parental cells in correlation with a significant upregulation of the
survivin (BIRC5) gene (twofold change, P<0.05). The knockdown of ZEB1 promoted
nuclear re-expression of E-cadherin, reduced expression of vimentin, N-cadherin, 
and BIRC5 genes, and reduced cell migration (P<0.05). Analysis of human thyroid
carcinoma showed a slight overexpression of the ABCG2/BCRP at stages I and II
(P<0.01), and a higher overexpression at stages III and IV (P<0.01). SNAIL1,
TWIST1, and ZEB1 genes showed higher expression at stages III and IV than at
stages I and II. E- and N-cadherin genes were upregulated at stages I and II of
the disease (ninefold and tenfold change, respectively, P<0.01) but downregulated
at stages III and IV (fourfold lower, P<0.01). These results could be a promising
starting point for further study of the role of the ABCG2/BCRP gene in the
progression of thyroid tumor.

PMID: 24643400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Sep;70(1):215-24. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-9885-8.

Tumor-suppressing effects of miR-429 on human osteosarcoma.

Liu X(1), Liu Y, Wu S, Shi X, Li L, Zhao J, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics of Jinling Hospital (Nanjing), School of Medicine,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, People's Republic of China.

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone tumor. Recent data indicated miRNAs 
may be involved in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma, suggesting some novel
targets for therapy. It is known that miR-429 is down-regulated and functions as 
a tumor suppressor by targeting c-myc and PLGG1 in gastric and breast cancer.
However, the exact role of miR-429 in osteosarcoma remained unknown. In our
study, we found MiR-429 was down-regulated in primary osteosarcoma lesion and
osteosarcoma cell lines. Moreover, MiR-429 can inhibit the proliferation of
osteosarcoma cell lines and induce more cell apoptosis. Also, we discovered
MiR-429 plays a role in osteosarcoma by binding the 3'UTR of zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) mRNA, and that overexpression of ZEB1 could
reverse the proliferation, subsequently blocking effect of miR-429. In
conclusion, miR-429 serves as a tumor suppressor via interaction with ZEB1. Our
finding may provide a new target for osteosarcoma therapy.

PMID: 24633485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dev Biol. 2014 Jul 1;391(1):111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.02.008. Epub 2014
Mar 12.

BMP antagonism by Noggin is required in presumptive notochord cells for mammalian
foregut morphogenesis.

Fausett SR(1), Brunet LJ(2), Klingensmith J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United
States. (2)Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, University of California
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States. Electronic address:
john.klingensmith@duke.edu.

Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is a serious human
birth defect, in which the esophagus ends before reaching the stomach, and is
aberrantly connected with the trachea. Several mouse models of EA/TEF have
recently demonstrated that proper dorsal/ventral (D/V) patterning of the
primitive anterior foregut endoderm is essential for correct compartmentalization
of the trachea and esophagus. Here we elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms
underlying the EA/TEF that occurs in mice lacking the BMP antagonist Noggin,
which display correct dorsal/ventral patterning. To clarify the mechanism of this
malformation, we use spatiotemporal manipulation of Noggin and BMP receptor 1A
conditional alleles during foregut development. Surprisingly, we find that the
expression of Noggin in the compartmentalizing endoderm is not required to
generate distinct tracheal and esophageal tubes. Instead, we show that Noggin and
BMP signaling attenuation are required in the early notochord to correctly
resolve notochord cells from the dorsal foregut endoderm, which in turn, appears 
to be a prerequisite for foregut compartmentalization. Collectively, our findings
support an emerging model for a mechanism underlying EA/TEF in which impaired
notochord resolution from the early endoderm causes the foregut to be
hypo-cellular just prior to the critical period of compartmentalization. Our
further characterizations suggest that Noggin may regulate a cell rearrangement
process that involves reciprocal E-cadherin and Zeb1 expression in the resolving 
notochord cells.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24631216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 18;289(16):11194-205. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.529172. Epub
2014 Mar 13.

Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) maintains basal epithelial expression of the miR-200 
family: implications for epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Kolesnikoff N(1), Attema JL, Roslan S, Bert AG, Schwarz QP, Gregory PA, Goodall
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Centre for Cancer Biology, University of South Australia and SA
Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is required for the specification of
tissues during embryonic development and is recapitulated during the metastatic
progression of tumors. The miR-200 family plays a critical role in enforcing the 
epithelial state with their expression lost in cells undergoing EMT. EMT can be
mediated by activation of the ZEB1 and ZEB2 (ZEB) transcription factors, which
repress miR-200 expression via a self-reinforcing double negative feedback loop
to promote the mesenchymal state. However, it remains unclear what factors drive 
and maintain epithelial-specific expression of miR-200 in the absence of
EMT-inducing factors. Here, we show that the transcription factor Specificity
Protein 1 (Sp1) binds to the miR-200b~200a~429 proximal promoter and activates
miR-200 expression in epithelial cells. In mesenchymal cells, Sp1 expression is
maintained, but its ability to activate the miR-200 promoter is perturbed by
ZEB-mediated repression. Reduction of Sp1 expression caused changes in
EMT-associated markers in epithelial cells. Furthermore, we observed
co-expression of Sp1 and miR-200 during mouse embryonic development wherein
miR-200 expression was only lost in regions with high ZEB expression. Together,
these findings indicate that miR-200 family members require Sp1 to drive basal
expression and to maintain an epithelial state.

PMCID: PMC4036258
PMID: 24627491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Int J Mol Med. 2014 May;33(5):1355-63. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1692. Epub 2014 Mar
10.

Identification of hypo- and hypermethylated genes related to atherosclerosis by a
genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation.

Yamada Y(1), Nishida T(1), Horibe H(2), Oguri M(3), Kato K(1), Sawabe M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Life Science Research Center, Mie
University, Tsu, Mie, Japan. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Gifu
Prefectural Tajimi Hospital, Tajimi, Gifu, Japan. (3)Department of Cardiology,
Japanese Red Cross Nagoya First Hospital, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. (4)Section of
Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Health Care Sciences, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Epigenetic modification, particularly changes in DNA methylation at gene
promoters, is implicated in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. However, the
analysis of DNA methylation in atherosclerosis has been limited to a few selected
candidate genes. In this study, we therefore performed a genome-wide analysis of 
DNA methylation in the atherosclerotic human aorta. A total of 48 post-mortem
human aortic intima specimens were examined. To avoid the effects of
interindividual variation, we performed intraindividual paired comparisons
between atheromatous plaque lesions and corresponding plaque-free tissue for 24
subjects. Bisulfite-modified genomic DNA was analyzed for DNA methylation with a 
specific microarray (Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip). We compensated for
multiple comparisons by applying Bonferroni's correction for statistical
significance of association. DNA methylation was significantly (P<1.03x10<U+207B>7)
reduced at 15 CpG sites in 14 genes and increased at 30 CpG sites in 22 genes in 
atheromatous plaque compared with plaque-free intima. Three of the hypomethylated
genes [Drosophila headcase (HECA), early B-cell factor 1 (EBF1) and
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2 (NOD2)] and three of the
hypermethylated genes [human mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase
kinase 4 (MAP4K4), zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and FYN] were
previously been implicated in atherosclerosis. The overexpression of HECA, EBF1
or NOD2 or the suppression of MAP4K4, ZEB1 or FYN expression in cultured HEK293
cells resulted in significant (P<4.80x10<U+207B>7) changes in the expression of
atherosclerosis-related genes, as determined with an expression microarray
(Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip). Our findings suggested that HECA,
EBF1 and NOD2 were significantly hypomethylated, whereas MAP4K4, ZEB1 and FYN
were hypermethylated, in atheromatous plaque lesions compared with plaque-free
intima. Epigenetic mechanisms may thus contribute to the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 24626634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Transl Med. 2014 Mar 14;12:68. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-68.

Regulation gene expression of miR200c and ZEB1 positively enhances effect of
tumor vaccine B16F10/GPI-IL-21 on inhibition of melanoma growth and metastasis.

Wang X, He X, Zhao F, Wang J, Zhang H, Shi F, Zhang Y, Cai K, Dou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology of Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210009, China. njdoujun@seu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Genetically modified cells have been shown to be one of the most
effective tumor vaccine strategies. However, in many cases, such as in melanoma, 
induction of a potent immune responses against the disease still remains a major 
challenge. Thus, novel strategies to reinforce tumor vaccine efficacy are needed.
Using microRNA (miR) and Zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox (ZEB) have received
much attention for potentially regulating tumor progression. To elicit a potent
antitumor efficacy against melanoma, we used tumor vaccine in combination with
miR200c overexpression or ZEB1 knockdown to assess the efficacy of treatment of
murine melanoma.
METHODS: B16F10 cell vaccine expressing interleukin 21 (IL-21) in the
glycosylpho- sphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored form (B16F10/GPI-IL-21) were
developed. The vaccine was immunized into mice challenged by B16F10 cells or
B16F10 cells stably transduced with lentiviral-miR200c (B16F10/miR200c) or
transfected with the ZEB1-shRNA recombinant (B16F10/shZEB1) or the
B16F10/GPI-IL-21 vaccine. The immune responses, tumorigenicity and lung
metastasis in mice were evaluated, respectively.
RESULTS: The vaccination with B16F10/GPI-IL-21 markedly increased the serum
cytokine levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, IL-4 and decreased TGF-ß level as well as
augmented the cytotoxicity of splenocytes in immunized mice compared with control
mice. In addition, the tumor vaccine B16F10/GPI-IL-21 significantly inhibited the
tumor growth and reduced counts of lung metastases in mice challenged by
B16F10/GPI-IL-21, B16F10/shZEB1 and B16F10/miR200c respectively compared with the
control mice challenged by B16F10 cells. The efficacy mechanisms may involve in
reinforcing immune responses, increasing expression of miR200c, E-cadherin and
SMAD-7 and decreasing expression of TGF-ß, ZEB1, Vimentin and N-cadherin in tumor
tissues from the immunized mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the tumor vaccine B16F10/GPI-IL-21 in
combination with miR200c overexpression or ZEB1 knockdown effectively inhibited
melanoma growth and metastasis a murine model. Such a strategy may, therefore, be
used for the clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC3995592
PMID: 24625224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 2;289(18):12550-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.488593. Epub 2014
Mar 10.

Long non-coding RNA HOTAIR is targeted and regulated by miR-141 in human cancer
cells.

Chiyomaru T(1), Fukuhara S, Saini S, Majid S, Deng G, Shahryari V, Chang I,
Tanaka Y, Enokida H, Nakagawa M, Dahiya R, Yamamura S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center 
and University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94121.

HOTAIR is a long non-coding RNA that interacts with the polycomb repressive
complex and suppresses its target genes. HOTAIR has also been demonstrated to
promote malignancy. MicroRNA-141 (miR-141) has been reported to play a role in
the epithelial to mesenchymal transition process, and the expression of miR-141
is inversely correlated with tumorigenicity and invasiveness in several human
cancers. We found that HOTAIR expression is inversely correlated to miR-141
expression in renal carcinoma cells. HOTAIR promotes malignancy, including
proliferation and invasion, whereas miR-141 suppresses malignancy in human cancer
cells. miR-141 binds to HOTAIR in a sequence-specific manner and suppresses
HOTAIR expression and functions, including proliferation and invasion. Both
HOTAIR and miR-141 were associated with the immunoprecipitated Ago2 (Argonaute2) 
complex, and the Ago2 complex cleaved HOTAIR in the presence of miR-141. These
results demonstrate that HOTAIR is suppressed by miR-141 in an Ago2-dependent
manner.

PMCID: PMC4007447
PMID: 24616104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Int J Cancer. 2014 Sep 15;135(6):1356-68. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28782. Epub 2014 Mar
3.

MiR-200c suppresses TGF-ß signaling and counteracts trastuzumab resistance and
metastasis by targeting ZNF217 and ZEB1 in breast cancer.

Bai WD(1), Ye XM, Zhang MY, Zhu HY, Xi WJ, Huang X, Zhao J, Gu B, Zheng GX, Yang 
AG, Jia LT.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology Department of Immunology, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Resistance to trastuzumab and concomitantly distal metastasis are leading causes 
of mortality in HER2-positive breast cancers, the molecular basis of which
remains largely unknown. Here, we generated trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer
cells with increased tumorigenicity and invasiveness compared with parental
cells, and observed robust epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
consistently elevated TGF-ß signaling in these cells. MiR-200c, which was the
most significantly downregulated miRNA in trastuzumab-resistant cells, restored
trastuzumab sensitivity and suppressed invasion of breast cancer cells by
concurrently targeting ZNF217, a transcriptional activator of TGF-ß, and ZEB1, a 
known mediator of TGF-ß signaling. Given the reported backward inhibition of
miR-200c by ZEB1, ZNF217 also exerts a feedback suppression of miR-200c via
TGF-ß/ZEB1 signaling. Restoration of miR-200c, silencing of ZEB1 or ZNF217 or
blockade of TGF-ß signaling increased trastuzumab sensitivity and suppressed
invasiveness of breast cancer cells. Therefore, our study unraveled nested
regulatory circuits of miR-200c/ZEB1 and miR-200c/ZNF217/TGF-ß/ZEB1 in
synergistically promoting trastuzumab resistance and metastasis of breast cancer 
cells. These findings provide novel insights into the common role of EMT and
related molecular machinery in mediating the malignant phenotypes of breast
cancers.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24615544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. PLoS Genet. 2014 Feb 27;10(2):e1004177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004177.
eCollection 2014.

miR-100 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition but suppresses tumorigenesis,
migration and invasion.

Chen D(1), Sun Y(2), Yuan Y(3), Han Z(2), Zhang P(1), Zhang J(1), You MJ(4),
Teruya-Feldstein J(5), Wang M(1), Gupta S(6), Hung MC(7), Liang H(8), Ma L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department
of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Department of Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Graduate Program in Structural and
Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Department of Hematopathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of
America ; Cancer Biology Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The
University of Texas Health, Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United
States of America. (5)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, United States of America. (6)Whitehead Institute for 
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(7)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Cancer Biology
Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas Health, 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(8)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(9)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Cancer Biology
Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas Health, 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Whether epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is always linked to increased
tumorigenicity is controversial. Through microRNA (miRNA) expression profiling of
mammary epithelial cells overexpressing Twist, Snail or ZEB1, we identified
miR-100 as a novel EMT inducer. Surprisingly, miR-100 inhibits the
tumorigenicity, motility and invasiveness of mammary tumor cells, and is commonly
downregulated in human breast cancer due to hypermethylation of its host gene
MIR100HG. The EMT-inducing and tumor-suppressing effects of miR-100 are mediated 
by distinct targets. While miR-100 downregulates E-cadherin by targeting SMARCA5,
a regulator of CDH1 promoter methylation, this miRNA suppresses tumorigenesis,
cell movement and invasion in vitro and in vivo through direct targeting of
HOXA1, a gene that is both oncogenic and pro-invasive, leading to repression of
multiple HOXA1 downstream targets involved in oncogenesis and invasiveness. These
findings provide a proof-of-principle that EMT and tumorigenicity are not always 
associated and that certain EMT inducers can inhibit tumorigenesis, migration and
invasion.

PMCID: PMC3937226
PMID: 24586203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Int J Oncol. 2014 May;44(5):1521-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2316. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

SCGB2A1 is a novel prognostic marker for colorectal cancer associated with
chemoresistance and radioresistance.

Munakata K(1), Uemura M(1), Takemasa I(1), Ozaki M(2), Konno M(2), Nishimura
J(1), Hata T(1), Mizushima T(1), Haraguchi N(1), Noura S(3), Ikenaga M(4),
Okamura S(5), Fukunaga M(6), Murata K(5), Yamamoto H(1), Doki Y(1), Mori M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Japan. (2)Department of Frontier Science for Cancer and Chemotherapy,
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Japan. (3)Department of Surgery,
Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Japan. (4)Department
of Surgery, Osaka Rosai Hospital, Japan. (5)Department of Surgery, Suita
Municipal Hospital, Japan. (6)Department of Surgery, Sakai City Hospital, Japan.

We recently showed that liver metastatic tissue from patients with colorectal
cancer (CRC) was a useful model for identifying novel, hypoxia-inducible genes
and prognostic markers. We showed that the expression of secretoglobin, family
2A, member 1 (SCGB2A1) was a potential prognostic factor for CRC. Here, we
further evaluated the prognostic impact and function of SCGB2A1 in 222 patients
with CRC. The impact of SCGB2A1 expression on disease-free survival (DFS) and
overall survival (OS) was assessed with mRNA expression profiling. The function
of SCGB2A1 was analyzed by evaluating mRNA expression profiles in cells derived
from patients with CRC and by testing the effects of transfecting SCGB2A1 into
different CRC-derived cell lines. We evaluated the effects of SCGB2A1 on
proliferation, chemosensitivity, radiation sensitivity and sphere formation.
Univariate and multivariate analyses indicated that the expression of SCGB2A1 was
an independent prognostic factor for CRC (p<0.05), together with lymph node
metastasis (p<0.05). Enforced expression of SCGB2A1 in CRC-derived cell lines
promoted proliferation (DLD1, SW480 and LoVo cells; p<0.05), decreased
chemosensitivity to 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin (DLD1 and SW480 cell lines;
p<0.05), and significantly increased the viability of irradiated cells (DLD1,
SW480 and LoVo cell lines; p<0.05). SCGB2A1 expression was also correlated to
cancer stemness-related genes (Wnt, Zeb1 and Twist). Consistent with this
correlation, SCGB2A1 expressing cells (SW480) showed increased sphere formation
(p<0.05). These results indicated that SCGB2A1 represented a novel, prognostic
factor for CRC, and that expression of SCGB2A1 correlated with chemoresistance,
radioresistance and cancer cell stemness.

PMID: 24585249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Feb 27;5:e1092. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.32.

Knockdown of BAG3 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition in thyroid cancer
cells through ZEB1 activation.

Meng X(1), Kong DH(2), Li N(2), Zong ZH(2), Liu BQ(2), Du ZX(3), Guan Y(2), Cao
L(4), Wang HQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, China Medical University,
Shenyang 110001, China [2] Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Ministry of Public
Health, and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry of Education, China 
Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the 1st Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Cell Biology,
Ministry of Public Health, and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry
of Education, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

The process by which epithelial features are lost in favor of a mesenchymal
phenotype is referred to as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Most
carcinomas use this mechanism to evade into neighboring tissues. Reduction or a
loss of E-cadherin expression is a well-established hallmark of EMT. As a potent 
suppressor of E-cadherin, transcription factor ZEB1 is one of the key inducers of
EMT, whose expression promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis of carcinomas.
Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) affects multifaceted cellular functions,
including proliferation, apoptosis, cell adhesion and invasion, viral infection, 
and autophagy. Recently, we have reported a novel role of BAG3 implicated in EMT,
while the mechanisms are poorly elucidated. The current study demonstrated that
knockdown of BAG3 induced EMT, and increased cell migratory and invasiveness in
thyroid cancer cells via transcriptional activation of ZEB1. We also found that
BAG3 knockdown led to nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin, which was responsible
for the transcriptional activation of ZEB1. These results indicate BAG3 as a
regulator of ZEB1 expression in EMT and as a regulator of metastasis in thyroid
cancer cells, providing potential targets to prevent and/or treat thyroid cancer 
cell invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3944249
PMID: 24577090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Oncol Rep. 2014 Apr;31(4):1905-10. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3046. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

miR-1236-3p represses the cell migration and invasion abilities by targeting ZEB1
in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Yan S(1), Liu X(1), Zhang W(1), Li Y(1), Dong R(1), Zhang Q(1), Yang
Q(2), Yuan C(1), Shen K(3), Kong B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China. (2)Department of Breast
Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong
250012, P.R. China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union
Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, P.R.
China.

Ovarian cancer, particularly high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HG-SOC), is
still the main cause of death among gynecological malignancies. However, the
molecular mechanisms related to its malignant biological behavior are still
unclear. Recent studies indicate that microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role
in tumor metastasis. Here, we report that miR-1236-3p expression was
downregulated in HG-SOC when compared to that in normal fallopian tube tissue.
Manipulation of miR-1236-3p significantly influenced the morphology, migration
and invasion of ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780 and SKOV3). With dual-luciferase
reporter assay, we demonstrated that miR-1236-3p binds to the 3'UTR of
zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) mRNA, and functions as a negative
regulator of ZEB1. Furthermore, we revealed that manipulation of miR-1236-3p
modulates ZEB1 expression and influences expression of its downstream genes
E-cadherin and N-cadherin at both the mRNA and protein levels. We also found an
inverse relationship between miR-1236-3p and ZEB1 expression in the HG-SOC tissue
samples. Taken together, our results indicate that miR-1236-3p regulates ovarian 
cancer metastasis by directly targeting ZEB1, and it may play an important role
in the diagnosis and treatment of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 24573236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Mar 20;55(3):1770-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-12988.

The Epstein-Barr virus causes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human corneal 
epithelial cells via Syk/src and Akt/Erk signaling pathways.

Park GB(1), Kim D, Kim YS, Kim S, Lee HK, Yang JW, Hur DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Research Center for Tumor Immunology, Inje
University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: Although Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated keratitis is rare, it can
cause acute corneal necrosis and neovascularization. We aimed to examine the
signaling mechanism by which EBV causes epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
in human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) in vitro.
METHODS: The cellular response to EBV was assessed by real-time PCR, Western
blot, migration assay, invasion assay, inhibitor assay, and ELISA assay.
RESULTS: A model of EBV-induced EMT was established in HCECs. The EBV induced
morphologic changes in the cells; the loss of epithelial markers E-cadherin,
ZO-1, and ß-catenin; and an increase in the mesenchymal markers N-cadherin,
Vimentin, Snail, and TCF8/Zeb1. The EBV infection also led to the nuclear
translocation of Snail and TCF8/Zeb1; enhanced the secretion of IL-6, IL-8, VEGF,
TGF-ß1, TNF-a, and MCP-1; and upregulated the expression of MMP2 and MMP9. The
EBV-infected HCECs exhibited increased migration and invasiveness compared to
uninfected HCECs. We measured the involvement of Syk, Src, PI3K/Akt, and Erk
signaling, but not Smad, in EMT by EBV-induced TGF-ß1. We demonstrated that
treatment with TGF-ß1, TGF-ß receptors, Syk, or Src inhibitor blocked TGF-ß1,
Syk, or Src signaling activation, and EMT development by EBV. Moreover, these
inhibitors prevented PI3K/Akt and Erk activation.
CONCLUSIONS: An EBV infection in HCECs can lead to a mesenchymal fibroblast-like 
morphology, and cause EMT through the activation of PI3K/Akt and Erk by
TGF-ß1-mediated Syk and Src signaling. This phenomenon may have implications for 
EBV-associated keratitis and molecular approaches to treatment.

PMID: 24569586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 12;14:85. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-85.

MiR-200a inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition of pancreatic cancer stem
cell.

Lu Y, Lu J, Li X, Zhu H, Fan X, Zhu S, Wang Y, Guo Q, Wang L, Huang Y, Zhu M(1), 
Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu Province 226001, P, R, China. zmy5661@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is one of the most aggressive cancers, and the
aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer is in part due to its intrinsic and extrinsic
drug resistance characteristics, which are also associated with the acquisition
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Increasing evidence suggests that 
EMT-type cells share many biological characteristics with cancer stem-like cells.
And miR-200 has been identified as a powerful regulator of EMT.
METHODS: Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs) of human pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1
were processed for CD24, CD44 and ESA multi-colorstaining, and sorted out on a BD
FACS Aria II machine. RT-qPCR was performed using the miScript PCR Kit to assay
the expression of miR-200 family. In order to find the role of miR-200a in the
process of EMT, miR-200a mimic was transfected to CSCs.
RESULTS: Pancreatic cancer cells with EMT phenotype displayed stem-like cell
features characterized by the expression of cell surface markers CD24, CD44 and
epithelial-specific antigen (ESA), which was associated with decreased expression
of miR-200a. Moreover, overexpression of miR-200a was resulted in down-regulation
of N-cadherin, ZEB1 and vimentin, but up-regulation of E-cadherin. In addition,
miR-200a overexpression inhibited cell migration and invasion in CSCs.
CONCLUSION: In our study, we found that miR-200a played an important role in
linking the characteristics of cancer stem-like cells with EMT-like cell
signatures in pancreatic cancer. Selective elimination of cancer stem-like cells 
by reversing the EMT phenotype to mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET)
phenotype using novel agents would be useful for prevention and/or treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3923443
PMID: 24521357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Neurooncol. 2014 Mar;117(1):15-24. doi: 10.1007/s11060-013-1340-y. Epub 2014
Feb 9.

Detection of primary cilia in human glioblastoma.

Sarkisian MR(1), Siebzehnrubl D, Hoang-Minh L, Deleyrolle L, Silver DJ,
Siebzehnrubl FA, Guadiana SM, Srivinasan G, Semple-Rowland S, Harrison JK,
Steindler DA, Reynolds BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA, msarkisian@ufl.edu.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant adult brain tumor and carries a
poor prognosis due to primary and acquired resistance. While many cellular
features of GBM have been documented, it is unclear if cells within these tumors 
extend a primary cilium, an organelle whose associated signaling pathways may
regulate proliferation, migration, and survival of neural precursor and tumor
cells. Using immunohistochemical and electron microscopy (EM) techniques, we
screened human GBM tumor biopsies and primary cell lines for cilia.
Immunocytochemical staining of five primary GBM cell lines revealed that between 
8 and 25 % of the cells in each line possessed gamma tubulin-positive basal
bodies from which extended acetylated, alpha-tubulin-positive axonemes. EM
analyses confirmed the presence of cilia at the cell surface and revealed that
their axonemes contained organized networks of microtubules, a structural feature
consistent with our detection of IFT88 and Arl13b, two trafficked cilia proteins,
along the lengths of the axonemes. Notably, cilia were detected in each of 23
tumor biopsies (22 primary and 1 recurrent) examined. These cilia were
distributed across the tumor landscape including regions proximal to the
vasculature and within necrotic areas. Moreover, ciliated cells within these
tumors co-stained with Ki67, a marker for actively dividing cells, and ZEB1, a
transcription factor that is upregulated in GBM and linked to tumor initiation,
invasion, and chemoresistance. Collectively, our data show that subpopulations of
cells within human GBM tumors are ciliated. In view of mounting evidence
supporting roles of primary cilia in tumor initiation and propagation, it is
likely that further study of the effects of cilia on GBM tumor cell function will
improve our understanding of GBM pathogenesis and may provide new directions for 
GBM treatment strategies.

PMCID: PMC4433742
PMID: 24510433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Oncol. 2014 May;8(3):565-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.01.004. Epub 2014 Jan
15.

Honokiol inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer cells by
targeting signal transducer and activator of transcription 3/Zeb1/E-cadherin
axis.

Avtanski DB(1), Nagalingam A(1), Bonner MY(2), Arbiser JL(3), Saxena NK(4),
Sharma D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, The
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231, 
USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Winship
Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; 
Atlanta Veterans Administration Medical Center, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 660 W
Redwood St., Howard Hall, Rm 301, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address:
nsaxena@medicine.umaryland.edu. (5)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at
Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. Electronic address: dsharma7@jhmi.edu.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a critical step in the acquisition of
metastatic state, is an attractive target for therapeutic interventions directed 
against tumor metastasis. Honokiol (HNK) is a natural phenolic compound isolated 
from an extract of seed cones from Magnolia grandiflora. Recent studies from our 
lab show that HNK impedes breast carcinogenesis. Here, we provide molecular
evidence that HNK inhibits EMT in breast cancer cells resulting in significant
downregulation of mesenchymal marker proteins and concurrent upregulation of
epithelial markers. Experimental EMT induced by exposure to TGFß and TNFa in
spontaneously immortalized nontumorigenic human mammary epithelial cells is also 
completely reversed by HNK as evidenced by morphological as well as molecular
changes. Investigating the downstream mediator(s) that may direct EMT inhibition 
by HNK, we found functional interactions between HNK, Stat3, and EMT-signaling
components. In vitro and in vivo analyses show that HNK inhibits Stat3 activation
in breast cancer cells and tumors. Constitutive activation of Stat3 abrogates
HNK-mediated activation of epithelial markers whereas inhibition of Stat3 using
small molecule inhibitor, Stattic, potentiates HNK-mediated inhibition of EMT
markers, invasion and migration of breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, HNK
inhibits recruitment of Stat3 on mesenchymal transcription factor Zeb1 promoter
resulting in decreased Zeb1 expression and nuclear translocation. We also
discover that HNK increases E-cadherin expression via Stat3-mediated release of
Zeb1 from E-cadherin promoter. Collectively, this study reports that HNK
effectively inhibits EMT in breast cancer cells and provide evidence for a
previously unrecognized cross-talk between HNK and Stat3/Zeb1/E-cadherin axis.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4009450
PMID: 24508063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Oncol Rep. 2014 Apr;31(4):1573-80. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3012. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

A lentivirus-mediated miR-23b sponge diminishes the malignant phenotype of glioma
cells in vitro and in vivo.

Chen L(1), Zhang K(1), Shi Z(1), Zhang A(1), Jia Z(1), Wang G(1), Pu P(1), Kang
C(1), Han L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital;
Tianjin Neurological Institute; Key Laboratory of Post-Trauma Neuro-Repair and
Regeneration in the Central Nervous System, Ministry of Education; Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Injuries, Variations and Regeneration of the Nervous System,
Tianjin 300052, P.R. China.

microRNA (miRNA) sponges are RNA molecules with repeated miRNA binding sequences 
that can sequester miRNAs from their endogenous target mRNAs, and a stably
expressed miRNA sponge is particularly valuable for long-term loss-of-function
studies in vitro and in vivo. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common
primary brain tumor in adults and is characterized by extraordinarily angiogenic,
invasive and migratory capabilities, hallmark features that make the disease
incurable. Nonetheless, improvements in clinical treatment and a better
understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms have been achieved within
the past few decades. miR-23b has previously been found to function as a tumor
oncogene in GBM. In the present study, we employed an microRNA sponge that was
forcibly expressed using a lentiviral vector to knock down the expression of
miR-23b in vitro and in vivo and assessed the pleiotropic effects on glioma
angiogenesis, invasion and migration. We demonstrated that the inhibition of
miR-23b in glioma cell lines and orthotopic tumor mouse models resulted in a
reduction in tumor malignancy, through the downregulation of HIF-1a, ß-catenin,
MMP2, MMP9, VEGF and ZEB1 and increased expression of VHL and E-cadherin.
Therefore, we suggest that this miR-23b sponge could be developed into a
promising anticancer therapy either alone or in combination with current targeted
therapies.

PMID: 24503899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Int J Cancer. 2014 Sep 1;135(5):1019-27. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28761. Epub 2014 Feb
19.

MicroRNA control of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer stem cells.

Hao J(1), Zhang Y, Deng M, Ye R, Zhao S, Wang Y, Li J, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China 
Hospital of Stomatology, West China School of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041, China.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent a small subset of cancer cell populations that
possess characteristics associated with normal stem cells. They have the ability 
to self-renew, and are able to generate diverse tumor cells and account for
metastases. Therefore, CSCs are widely accepted as potential mediators of
therapeutic resistance and novel targets for anti-cancer treatments. Recent
progress has highlighted the significance of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) process in CSC formation, as well as the crucial role of microRNAs in
controlling EMT and cancer metastasis. MicroRNAs are also reported to take part
in the control of CSC functions and the regulation of cancer progression by
affecting EMT process. Thus, it is highly crucial to develop deeper understanding
of the mechanisms that how microRNAs control EMT processes and regulate CSC
functions for better therapeutics of cancer disease. Herein we make this review
to summarize the current understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of EMT in CSC
initiation, with a special focus on the role of microRNAs in EMT control, and
discuss the implications of targeting CSCs for cancer therapeutics.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24500893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87386. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087386. eCollection
2014.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition induces endoplasmic-reticulum-stress response
in human colorectal tumor cells.

Zeindl-Eberhart E(1), Brandl L(1), Liebmann S(1), Ormanns S(1), Scheel SK(1),
Brabletz T(2), Kirchner T(1), Jung A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (2)Department
of Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Tumor cells are stressed by unfavorable environmental conditions like hypoxia or 
starvation. Driven by the resulting cellular stress tumor cells undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Additionally, cellular stress is accompanied
by endoplasmic reticulum-stress which induces an unfolded protein response. It is
unknown if epithelial-mesenchymal transition and endoplasmic reticulum-stress are
occurring as independent parallel events or if an interrelationship exists
between both of them. Here, we show that in colorectal cancer cells endoplasmic
reticulum-stress depends on the induction of ZEB-1, which is a main factor of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. In the absence of ZEB-1 colorectal cancer
cells cannot mount endoplasmic reticulum-stress as a reaction on cellular stress 
situations like hypoxia or starvation. Thus, our data suggest that there is a
hierarchy in the development of cellular stress which starts with the presence of
environmental stress that induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition which allows 
finally endoplasmic reticulum-stress. This finding highlights the central role of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition during the process of tumorigenesis as
epithelial-mesenchymal transition is also associated with chemoresistance and
cancer stemness. Consequently, endoplasmic reticulum-stress might be a well
suited target for chemotherapy of colorectal cancers.

PMCID: PMC3909180
PMID: 24498091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Mar 4;21(2):311-26. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0548. Print
2014 Apr.

RANK- and c-Met-mediated signal network promotes prostate cancer metastatic
colonization.

Chu GC(1), Zhau HE, Wang R, Rogatko A, Feng X, Zayzafoon M, Liu Y, Farach-Carson 
MC, You S, Kim J, Freeman MR, Chung LW.

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research, Department of Medicine, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8750 Beverly Blvd., Atrium 103, Los
Angeles, California 90048, USA Departments of Surgery Biomedical Sciences
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Center, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, USA
Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 
Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas,
USA.

Prostate cancer (PCa) metastasis to bone is lethal and there is no adequate
animal model for studying the mechanisms underlying the metastatic process. Here,
we report that receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL) expressed by PCa cells 
consistently induced colonization or metastasis to bone in animal models.
RANK-mediated signaling established a premetastatic niche through a feed-forward 
loop, involving the induction of RANKL and c-Met, but repression of androgen
receptor (AR) expression and AR signaling pathways. Site-directed mutagenesis and
transcription factor (TF) deletion/interference assays identified common TF
complexes, c-Myc/Max, and AP4 as critical regulatory nodes. RANKL-RANK signaling 
activated a number of master regulator TFs that control the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (Twist1, Slug, Zeb1, and Zeb2), stem cell
properties (Sox2, Myc, Oct3/4, and Nanog), neuroendocrine differentiation (Sox9, 
HIF1a, and FoxA2), and osteomimicry (c-Myc/Max, Sox2, Sox9, HIF1a, and Runx2).
Abrogating RANK or its downstream c-Myc/Max or c-Met signaling network minimized 
or abolished skeletal metastasis in mice. RANKL-expressing LNCaP cells recruited 
and induced neighboring non metastatic LNCaP cells to express RANKL,
c-Met/activated c-Met, while downregulating AR expression. These initially
non-metastatic cells, once retrieved from the tumors, acquired the potential to
colonize and grow in bone. These findings identify a novel mechanism of tumor
growth in bone that involves tumor cell reprogramming via RANK-RANKL signaling,
as well as a form of signal amplification that mediates recruitment and stable
transformation of non-metastatic bystander dormant cells.

PMCID: PMC3959765
PMID: 24478054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Lab Invest. 2014 Apr;94(4):362-70. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.153. Epub 2014 Jan
27.

Inhibition of TBK1 attenuates radiation-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
of A549 human lung cancer cells via activation of GSK-3ß and repression of ZEB1.

Liu W(1), Huang YJ(1), Liu C(1), Yang YY(1), Liu H(1), Cui JG(1), Cheng Y(1), Gao
F(1), Cai JM(1), Li BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Faculty of Naval Medicine, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, PR China.

Radiotherapy is an effective treatment method for lung cancer, particularly when 
the disease is at an advanced stage. However, previous researchers have observed 
that the majority of patients with conventional radiation therapy develop distant
metastases and succumb to the disease. Thus, identifying and understanding novel 
pathways for the development of new therapeutic targets is a major goal in
research on pulmonary neoplasms. Recent studies suggest that
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the most important contributor to
cancer metastasis. Induction of this complex process requires endogenously
produced microRNAs; specifically, downregulation of the miRNA-200c causes an
induction of EMT. We recently identified the tank-binding kinase-1 (TBK1) as a
downstream effector of the miR-200c-driven pathway, but the biological function
of TBK1 in EMT remains unknown. In this study, we tested whether TBK1 has a role 
in radiation-induced EMT and identified associated potential mechanisms. Human
alveolar type II epithelial carcinoma A549 cells were irradiated with (60)Co
<U+03B3>-rays. Western blotting revealed a time- and dose-dependent decrease in
E-cadherin with a concomitant increase in vimentin after radiation, suggesting
that the epithelial cells acquired a mesenchymal-like morphology. TBK1 siRNA
significantly inhibited radiation-induced suppression of the epithelial marker
E-cadherin and upregulation of the mesenchymal marker vimentin. The invasion and 
migratory potential of lung cancer cells upon radiation treatment was also
reduced by TBK1 knockdown. Furthermore, radiation-induced EMT attenuated by TBK1 
depletion was partially dependent on transcriptional factor ZEB1 expression.
Finally, we found glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) is involved in regulation 
of radiation-induced EMT by TBK1. Thus, our findings reveal that TBK1 signaling
regulates radiation-induced EMT by controlling GSK-3ß phosphorylation and ZEB1
expression. TBK1 may therefore constitute a useful target for treatment of
radiotherapy-induced metastasis diseases.

PMID: 24468793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e84597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084597. eCollection
2014.

MicroRNA-147 induces a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) and reverses
EGFR inhibitor resistance.

Lee CG(1), McCarthy S(2), Gruidl M(2), Timme C(2), Yeatman TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gibbs Cancer Center & Research Institute, Spartanburg, South Carolina, United 
States of America. (2)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa,
Florida, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key developmental
program that is often activated during cancer progression and may promote
resistance to therapy. An analysis of patients (n = 71) profiled with both gene
expression and a global microRNA assessment (~ 415 miRs) identified miR-147 as
highly anti-correlated with an EMT gene expression signature score and postulated
to reverse EMT (MET).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: miR-147 was transfected into colon cancer cells (HCT116,
SW480) as well as lung cancer cells (A-549). The cells were assessed for
morphological changes, and evaluated for effects on invasion, motility, and the
expression of key EMT markers. Resistance to chemotherapy was evaluated by
treating cells with gefitinib, an EGFR inhibitor. The downstream genes regulated 
by miR-147 were assayed using the Affymetrix GeneChip U133 Plus2.0 platform.
miR-147 was identified to: 1. cause MET primarily by increasing the expression of
CDH1 and decreasing that of ZEB1; 2. inhibit the invasion and motility of cells; 
3. cause G1 arrest by up-regulating p27 and down-regulating cyclin D1. miR-147
also dramatically reversed the native drug resistance of the colon cancer cell
line HCT116 to gefitinib. miR-147 significantly repressed Akt phosphorylation,
and knockdown of Akt with siRNA induced MET. The morphologic effects of miR-147
on cells appear to be attenuated by TGF-B1, promoting a plastic and reversible
transition between MET and EMT.
CONCLUSION: miR-147 induced cancer cells to undergo MET and induced cell cycle
arrest, suggesting a potential tumor suppressor role. miR-147 strikingly
increased the sensitivity to EGFR inhibitor, gefitinib in cell with native
resistance. We conclude that miR-147 might have therapeutic potential given its
ability to inhibit proliferation, induce MET, as well as reverse drug
sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC3893127
PMID: 24454732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Surg Oncol. 2014 Jun;109(7):684-9. doi: 10.1002/jso.23564. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition predicts prognosis in clinical gastric
cancer.

Murai T(1), Yamada S, Fuchs BC, Fujii T, Nakayama G, Sugimoto H, Koike M,
Fujiwara M, Tanabe KK, Kodera Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery (Surgery II), Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered to play an
important role in cancer invasion and metastasis.
METHODS: The mRNA levels of an epithelial marker (E-cadherin), mesenchymal marker
(vimentin), and Zeb-1 were measured in 11 gastric cancer cell lines. Functional
analysis was performed using Zeb-1 knockdown. EMT status of 116 gastric cancer
patients was determined by calculating the vimentin/E-cadherin mRNA expression
ratio in cancerous tissue and the correlation between EMT status,
clinicopathological factors, prognosis, and Zeb-1 were analyzed.
RESULTS: Cell lines were classified as epithelial or mesenchymal. Zeb-1
expression was significantly correlated with the mesenchymal phenotype. Treatment
with Zeb-1 siRNA also reduced the capacity to proliferate, migrate, and invade.
Patients were classified as epithelial or mesenchymal by V/E ratio
(vimentin/E-cadherin ratio) and as Zeb-1 low or high expression group. The
mesenchymal group was significantly associated with diffuse type cancer and stage
IV. On multivariate analysis, the EMT status (mesenchymal group) was an
independent prognostic factor (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022). There was a significant correlation
between the V/E ratio and Zeb-1 expression (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.73). Patients in Zeb-1 high
group had significantly poorer survival than those in low group (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0071).
CONCLUSIONS: EMT is a critical prognostic factor for gastric cancer. Zeb-1 might 
be a promising therapeutic target.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24453058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Apr;50(6):1195-206. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.12.025. Epub 2014
Jan 18.

Activation of histamine H4 receptors decreases epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition progress by inhibiting transforming growth factor-ß1 signalling
pathway in non-small cell lung cancer.

Cai WK(1), Hu J(2), Li T(3), Meng JR(4), Ma X(4), Yin SJ(5), Zhao CH(5), He
GH(6), Xu GL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kunming General Hospital of Chengdu Military Region,
Kunming, China; Department of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Kunming General Hospital
of Chengdu Military Region, Kunming, China. (2)Experiment Teaching Center of
Basic Medicine, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China; Department 
of Histology and Embryology, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
China. (3)Department of Histology and Embryology, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China. (4)Department of Pharmacology, The Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, China. (5)Department of Pharmacy, Kunming General
Hospital of Chengdu Military Region, Kunming, China. (6)Department of Pharmacy,
Kunming General Hospital of Chengdu Military Region, Kunming, China. Electronic
address: gonghow@hotmail.com. (7)Department of Pharmacy, Kunming General Hospital
of Chengdu Military Region, Kunming, China. Electronic address:
kmxuguili@126.com.

Previous investigations found that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was
an important character of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and it was also
suggested that histamine H4 receptors may have a role in preventing EMT progress 
in certain kind of tumours. However, the effect of H4 receptor activation on EMT 
progress of NSCLC and its potential mechanisms remain unclear. Therefore, we
performed both in vitro and in vivo experiments to explore the effects of
specific H4 receptor agonist 4-methylhistamine and antagonist JNJ7777120 on EMT
progress. We showed the expression of H4 receptors in NSCLC and found that
4-methylhistamine increased the expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin
and decreased the expression of Vimentin, the mesenchymal marker, in both NSCLC
cell lines and xenograft NSCLC tumours. Pretreatment with JNJ7777120 or H4
receptor gene silencing decreased while overexpression of H4 receptors
facilitated this effect of 4-methylhistamine. Furthermore, we showed that
down-regulation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) was the secondary
signalling after H4 receptor activation, which in turn resulted in inactivation
of transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) pathway and down-regulation of several 
important EMT inducing factors such as ZEB1, Snail and Slug. In conclusion, these
findings revealed the anti-EMT effect of histamine H4 receptor activation in
NSCLC, which provide novel insight into the development mechanism of NSCLC; and
H4 receptors may be a new therapeutic target for NSCLC treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24447834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Apr;33(4):879-86. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1625. Epub 2014 Jan 
14.

Role of miR-200c/miR-141 in the regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and migration in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Tamagawa S(1), Beder LB(1), Hotomi M(1), Gunduz M(2), Yata K(1), Grenman R(3),
Yamanaka N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Wakayama Medical
University, Wakayama, Japan. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Turgut Ozal
University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. (3)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Turku University Central Hospital,
Turku, Finland.

Epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) is a critical step in tumor invasion and 
metastasis, while its fate is mainly defined by the balanced expression between
the miR-200 family and ZEB transcription factors. In this study, we observed a
reciprocal correlation between miR-200c/mir-141 and ZEB1, as well as between ZEB2
and E-cadherin expression in a panel of 13 head and neck squamous cell carcinoma 
(HNSCC) cell lines. We also confirmed that the enforced expression of miR-200c
and miR-141 significantly reduced the migration capacity of HNSCC cells.
Accordingly, the enforced expression of miR-200c and mir-141 resulted in a
significant upregulation in E-cadherin expression, contrary to the significant
downregulation in ZEB1 expression in 3 cell lines (UTSCC-24A, UTSCC-24B and
UTSCC-6A cells). Another pair of cell lines, UTSCC-60A and UTSCC- 60B failed to
show a significant change in the expression of E-cadherin or ZEB1/ZEB2 during the
enforced expression of miR-200c/miR-141. To address the issue, we focused on the 
hypermethylation status of the ZEB1/2 promoters, which have both been shown to
include wide CpG islands. We observed a marked upregulation in both ZEB1 and ZEB2
mRNA expression following treatment with a demethylating agent in both pairs of
UTSCC cell lines. In conclusion, our findings confirm the existence of a
reciprocal correlation between the mir-200 family and the ZEB family, and
demonstrate the role of the miR-200 family in EMT, as well as in the migration
and invasion ability of HNSCC cells. Furthermore, our data suggest that the
promoter hypermethylation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 may play an essential role and may
overshadow the effects of the miR-200 family in the regulation of EMT during
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 24424572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):194-5. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.178.

Tumour-promoting role of EMT-inducing transcription factor ZEB1 in mantle cell
lymphoma.

Sayan AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences Division, Somers Cancer Research Building, University of
Southampton, Tremona Road, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.

Comment on
    Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):247-57.

PMCID: PMC3890963
PMID: 24413199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Neoplasia. 2013 Dec;15(12):1330-46.

Inflammatory factors of the tumor microenvironment induce plasticity in
nontransformed breast epithelial cells: EMT, invasion, and collapse of normally
organized breast textures.

Leibovich-Rivkin T(1), Liubomirski Y(1), Bernstein B(1), Meshel T(1), Ben-Baruch 
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Research and Immunology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Nontransformed breast epithelial cells that are adjacent to tumor cells are
constantly exposed to tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa) and interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß), 
two inflammatory cytokines identified as having pro-tumoral causative roles. We
show that continuous stimulation of nontransformed breast epithelial cells by
TNFa + IL-1ß for 2 to 3 weeks induced their spreading and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The mechanistic bases for this slow
induction of EMT by TNFa + IL-1ß are: 1) it took 2 to 3 weeks for the cytokines
to induce the expression of the EMT activators Zeb1 and Snail; 2) although Twist 
has amplified the EMT-inducing activities of Zeb1 + Snail, its expression was
reduced by TNFa + IL-1ß; however, the lack of Twist was compensated by prolonged 
stimulation with TNFa + IL-1ß that has potentiated the EMT-inducing activities of
Zeb1 + Snail. Stimulation by TNFa + IL-1ß has induced the following
dissemination-related properties in the nontransformed cells: 1) up-regulation of
functional matrix metalloproteinases; 2) induction of migratory and invasive
capabilities; 3) disruption of the normal phenotype of organized
three-dimensional acini structures typically formed only by nontransformed breast
cells and spreading of nontransformed cells out of such acini. Our findings
suggest that TNFa + IL-1ß induce dissemination of nontransformed breast
epithelial cells and their reseeding at the primary tumor site; if, then, such
detached cells are exposed to transforming events, they may form secondary
malignant focus and lead to disease recurrence. Thus, our study reveals novel
pathways through which the inflammatory microenvironment may contribute to
relapsed disease in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3884524
PMID: 24403855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Cancer Med. 2013 Oct;2(5):595-610. doi: 10.1002/cam4.109. Epub 2013 Aug 18.

Treatment with the vascular disruptive agent OXi4503 induces an immediate and
widespread epithelial to mesenchymal transition in the surviving tumor.

Fifis T(1), Nguyen L, Malcontenti-Wilson C, Chan LS, Nunes Costa PL, Daruwalla J,
Nikfarjam M, Muralidharan V, Waltham M, Thompson EW, Christophi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Heidelberg,
Victoria, 3084, Australia.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered an important mechanism
in tumor resistance to drug treatments; however, in vivo observation of this
process has been limited. In this study we demonstrated an immediate and
widespread EMT involving all surviving tumor cells following treatment of a mouse
model of colorectal liver metastases with the vascular disruptive agent OXi4503. 
EMT was characterized by significant downregulation of E-cadherin, relocation and
nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin as well as significant upregulation of ZEB1 and
vimentin. Concomitantly, significant temporal upregulation in hypoxia and the
pro-angiogenic growth factors hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha, hepatocyte growth
factor, vascular endothelial growth factor and transforming growth factor-beta
were seen within the surviving tumor. The process of EMT was transient and by
5 days after treatment tumor cell reversion to epithelial morphology was evident.
This reversal, termed mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) is a process
implicated in the development of new metastases but has not been observed in vivo
histologically. Similar EMT changes were observed in response to other antitumor 
treatments including chemotherapy, thermal ablation, and antiangiogenic
treatments in our mouse colorectal metastasis model and in a murine orthotopic
breast cancer model after OXi4503 treatment. These results suggest that EMT may
be an early mechanism adopted by tumors in response to injury and hypoxic stress,
such that inhibition of EMT in combination with other therapies could play a
significant role in future cancer therapy.

© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3892792
PMID: 24403226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 May;390(1-2):19-30. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1950-x. Epub
2014 Jan 10.

MiR-429 inhibits cells growth and invasion and regulates EMT-related marker genes
by targeting Onecut2 in colorectal carcinoma.

Sun Y(1), Shen S, Liu X, Tang H, Wang Z, Yu Z, Li X, Wu M.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Changsha, Hunan,
People's Republic of China.

The 5-year survival rate for colorectal cancer is approximately 55 % because of
its invasion and metastasis. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is one
of the well-defined processes during the invasion and distant metastasis of
primary epithelial tumors. miR-429, a member of the miR-200 family of microRNAs, 
was previously shown to inhibit the expression of transcriptional repressors
ZEB1/delta EF1 and SIP1/ZEB2, and regulate EMT. In this study, we showed that
miR-429 was significantly downregulated in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) tissues and
cell lines. We found that miR-429 inhibited the proliferation and growth of CRC
cells in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that miR-429 could play a role in CRC
tumorigenesis. We also showed that downregulation of miR-429 may contribute to
carcinogenesis and the initiation of EMT of CRC by targeting Onecut2. Further
researches indicated that miR-429 inhibited the cells migration and invasion and 
reversed TGF-ß-induced EMT changes in SW620 and SW480 cells. miR-429 could
reverse the change of EMT-related markers genes induced by TGF-ß1, such as
E-cadherin, CTNNA1, CTNNB1, TFN, CD44, MMP2, Vimentin, Slug, Snail, and ZEB2 by
targeting Onecut2. Taken together, our data showed that transcript factor Onecut2
is involved in the EMT, migration and invasion of CRC cells; miR-429 inhibits the
initiation of EMT and regulated expression of EMT-related markers by targeting
Onecut2; and miR-429 or Onecut2 is the important therapy target for CRC.

PMCID: PMC3972435
PMID: 24402783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Cancer Med. 2014 Feb;3(1):1-13. doi: 10.1002/cam4.159. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Crosstalk between the mesothelium and lymphomatous cells: insight into the
mechanisms involved in the progression of body cavity lymphomas.

Lignitto L(1), Mattiolo A, Negri E, Persano L, Gianesello L, Chieco-Bianchi L,
Calabrò ML.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Molecular Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology, IOV-IRCCS,
Padova, Italy.

The peculiar localization of body cavity lymphomas implies a specific
contribution of the intracavitary microenvironment to the pathogenesis of these
tumors. In this study, primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) was used as a model of
body cavity lymphoma to investigate the role of mesothelial cells, which line the
serous cavities, in lymphoma progression. The crosstalk between mesothelial and
lymphomatous cells was studied in cocultures of primary human mesothelial cells
(HMC) with PEL cells and a xenograft mouse model of peritoneal PEL. PEL cells
were found to induce type 2 epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in HMC, which
converted into a myofibroblastic phenotype characterized by loss of epithelial
markers (pan cytokeratin and E-cadherin), expression of EMT-associated
transcriptional repressors (Snail1, Slug, Zeb1, Sip1), and acquisition of
a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), a mesenchymal protein. A progressive thickening of
serosal membranes was observed in vivo, accompanied by loss of cytokeratin
staining and appearance of a-SMA-expressing cells, confirming that fibrosis
occurred during intracavitary PEL development. On the other hand, HMC were found 
to modulate PEL cell turnover in vitro, increasing their resistance to apoptosis 
and proliferation. This supportive activity on PEL cells was retained after
transdifferentiation, and was impaired by interferon-a2 b treatment. On the
whole, our results indicate that PEL cells induce type 2 EMT in HMC, which
support PEL cell growth and survival, providing a milieu favorable to lymphoma
progression. Our findings provide new clues into the mechanisms involved in
lymphoma progression and may indicate new targets for effective treatment of
malignant effusions growing in body cavities.

© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3930384
PMID: 24402744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Apr;18(4):698-708. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12219. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Arecoline-induced myofibroblast transdifferentiation from human buccal mucosal
fibroblasts is mediated by ZEB1.

Chang YC(1), Tsai CH, Lai YL, Yu CC, Chi WY, Li JJ, Chang WW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan;
Department of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

Oral submucous fibrosis (OSF) is considered as a pre-cancerous condition of the
oral mucosa and is highly associated with habitual areca quid chewing. Arecoline 
is the major alkaloid in areca quid and is thought to be involved in the
pathogenesis of OSF. Our previous studies have demonstrated that arecoline could 
induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related factors in primary human
buccal mucosal fibroblasts (BMFs). Therefore, we investigated the expression of
zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), which is a well-known
transcriptional factor in EMT, in OSF tissues and its role in arecoline-induced
myofibroblast transdifferentiation from BMFs. The expression of ZEB1, as well as 
the myofibroblast marker a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), was significantly
increased in OSF tissues, respectively. With immunofluorescence analysis,
arecoline induced the formation of a-SMA-positive stress fibres in BMFs
expressing nuclear ZEB1. Arecoline also induced collagen contraction of BMFs in
vitro. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, the binding of ZEB1 to the a-SMA
promoter in BMFs was increased by arecoline. The promoter activity of a-SMA in
BMFs was also induced by arecoline, while knockdown of ZEB1 abolished
arecoline-induced a-SMA promoter activity and collagen contraction of BMFs.
Long-term exposure of BMFs to arecoline induced the expression of fibrogenic
genes and ZEB1. Silencing of ZEB1 in fibrotic BMFs from an OSF patient also
suppressed the expression of a-SMA and myofibroblast activity. Inhibition of
insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 could suppress arecoline-induced ZEB1
activation in BMFs. Our data suggest that ZEB1 may participate in the
pathogenesis of areca quid-associated OSF by activating the a-SMA promoter and
inducing myofibroblast transdifferentiation from BMFs.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4000120
PMID: 24400868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mod Pathol. 2014 Aug;27(8):1116-25. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.229. Epub 2014
Jan 3.

Inhibition of ZEB1 by miR-200 characterizes Helicobacter pylori-positive gastric 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with a less aggressive behavior.

Huang WT(1), Kuo SH(2), Cheng AL(2), Lin CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Primary gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas may or may not have a concurrent
component of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma/mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas are often associated with
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection, suggesting that the large cells are
transformed from mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas. In contrast, only
limited data are available on the clinical and molecular features of pure gastric
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. In 102 pure gastric diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas, we found H. pylori infection in 53% of the cases. H. pylori-positive
gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas were more likely to present at an earlier 
stage (73% vs 52% at stage I/II, P=0.03), to achieve complete remission (75% vs
43%, P=0.001), and had a better 5-year disease-free survival rate (73% vs 29%,
P<0.001) than H. pylori-negative gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Through 
genome-wide expression profiles of both miRNAs and mRNAs in nine H.
pylori-positive and nine H. pylori-negative gastric diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas, we identified inhibition of ZEB1 (zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox
1) by miR-200 in H. pylori-positive gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. ZEB1,
a transcription factor for marginal zone B cells, can suppress BCL6, the master
transcription factor for germinal center B cells. In 30 H. pylori-positive and 30
H. pylori-negative gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, we confirmed that H.
pylori-positive gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas had higher levels of
miR-200 by qRT-PCR, and lower levels of ZEB1 and higher levels of BCL6 using
immunohistochemistry. As BCL6 is a known predictor of a better prognosis in
gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, our data demonstrate that inhibition of
ZEB1 by miR-200, with secondary increase in BCL6, is a molecular event that
characterizes H. pylori-positive gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphomas with a
less aggressive behavior.

PMID: 24390222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mod Pathol. 2014 Aug;27(8):1088-100. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.228. Epub 2014
Jan 3.

A novel hypoxia-associated subset of FN1 high MITF low melanoma cells:
identification, characterization, and prognostic value.

Wouters J(1), Stas M(2), Govaere O(1), Barrette K(3), Dudek A(4), Vankelecom
H(5), Haydu LE(6), Thompson JF(7), Scolyer RA(8), van den Oord JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cell and Tissue Research, Department of Imaging and Pathology,
University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium. (2)Surgical Oncology,
Department of Oncology, University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Laboratory of Dermatology, Department of Oncology, University of Leuven (KU
Leuven), Leuven, Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Cell Death Research and Therapy,
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Leuven (KU Leuven), 
Leuven, Belgium. (5)Embryo and Stem Cells, Department of Development and
Regeneration, University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium. (6)1] Melanoma
Institute Australia, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia [2] Discipline 
of Surgery, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
(7)Melanoma Institute Australia, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(8)1] Melanoma Institute Australia, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia 
[2] Tissue Pathology and Diagnostic Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Camperdown, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

In many human cancers, the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition has an important 
role in the induction of cancer stem-like cells, and hence, in the causation of
intratumoral heterogeneity. This process, also referred to as mesenchymal
mimicry, is, however, only poorly understood in melanoma and histological
correlation is still lacking. In an immunohistochemical analysis of a large
prospective series of 220 primary and metastatic melanomas for the well-known
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition marker FN1, we observed melanoma cells with 
high FN1 expression in metastases with ischemic necrosis, but rarely or not at
all in samples lacking evidence of hypoxia. In a blinded, retrospective series of
82 melanoma metastases with 10-year follow-up, the presence of clusters of these 
FN1(high) melanoma cells correlated significantly with shortened
melanoma-specific survival, highlighting the prognostic value of their presence. 
We describe in detail the unique light- and electron-microscopic features of
these FN1(high) melanoma cells, enabling their identification in routinely
hematoxylin-and-eosin-stained sections. In addition, by laser microdissection and
subsequent gene expression analysis and immunohistochemistry, we highlight their 
distinctive, molecular phenotype that includes expression of various markers of
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (eg, ZEB1) and of melanoma stem-like
cells (eg, NGFR), and lack of immunoreactivity for the melanocytic marker MITF.
This phenotype could be reproduced in vitro by culturing melanoma cells under
hypoxic conditions. Functionally, the hypoxic microenvironment was shown to
induce a more migratory and invasive cell type. In conclusion, we identified a
novel clinically relevant FN1(high)MITF(low) cell type in melanoma associated
with ischemic necrosis, and propose that these cells reside at the crossroad of
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and stem-like cell induction, plausibly 
triggered by the hypoxic environment.

PMID: 24390218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2014 Jan 1;19:113-25.

Embelin suppresses pancreatic cancer growth by modulating tumor immune
microenvironment.

Marsh JL(1), Jackman CP(1), Tang SN(2), Shankar S(3), Srivastava RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Texas Health Science Center at
Tyler, Tyler, Texas 75708. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and
Therapeutics, and Medicine, The University of Kansas Cancer Center, The
University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS
66160. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of
Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow
Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160.

Since pancreatic carcinoma is largely refractory to conventional therapies,
development of novel agents is required for the effective treatment of pancreatic
cancer. The objective of this paper was to examine the molecular mechanisms by
which embelin inhibited human pancreatic cancer growth in mice by modulating
tumor immune microenvironment. Embelin inhibited PANC-1 tumor growth,
angiogenesis, and metastasis which were associated with suppression of Akt and
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathways. Embelin inhibited the expression of Bcl-2, cyclin 
D1, CDK2 and CDK6, IL-6 and IL-8, and induced the expression of Bax in tumor
tissues. Embelin also reversed epithelial-mesenchymal transition by up-regulating
E-cadherin and inhibiting the expression of Snail, Slug and Zeb1. Embelin
inhibited pancreatic cancer growth in Kras(G12D) mice by modulating tumor immune 
microenvironment where CTL, NKT, <U+03B3>dT, NK, and IFN<U+03B3> (Th1 type) cells were
up-regulated, and Th17, PMN-MDSC, IL-6 and IL-8 (Th2 type) immune cells were
inhibited. These data suggest that embelin can inhibit pancreatic cancer growth
by modulating tumor immune microenvironment and Akt and Shh pathways, and
inhibiting inflammation. Embelin may offer therapeutic benefits for the treatment
and/or prevention of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 24389175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e84815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084815.
eCollection 2013.

The role of microRNA-200 in progression of human colorectal and breast cancer.

Bojmar L(1), Karlsson E(2), Ellegård S(2), Olsson H(3), Björnsson B(1), Hallböök 
O(1), Larsson M(4), Stål O(2), Sandström P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Surgery, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Linköping University, Department of Surgery in Östergötland, County
Council of Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden. (2)Oncology, Department of Clinical
and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University,
Department of Oncology, County Council of Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Pathology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Linköping University, Department of Pathology in Östergötland, County
Council of Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden. (4)Molecular Virology, Department of 
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden.

The role of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer has been
studied extensively in vitro, but involvement of the EMT in tumorigenesis in vivo
is largely unknown. We investigated the potential of microRNAs as clinical
markers and analyzed participation of the EMT-associated
microRNA-200-ZEB-E-cadherin pathway in cancer progression. Expression of the
microRNA-200 family was quantified by real-time RT-PCR analysis of fresh-frozen
and microdissected formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded primary colorectal tumors,
normal colon mucosa, and matched liver metastases. MicroRNA expression was
validated by in situ hybridization and after in vitro culture of the malignant
cells. To assess EMT as a predictive marker, factors considered relevant in
colorectal cancer were investigated in 98 primary breast tumors from a
treatment-randomized study. Associations between the studied EMT-markers were
found in primary breast tumors and in colorectal liver metastases. MicroRNA-200
expression in epithelial cells was lower in malignant mucosa than in normal
mucosa, and was also decreased in metastatic compared to non-metastatic
colorectal cancer. Low microRNA-200 expression in colorectal liver metastases was
associated with bad prognosis. In breast cancer, low levels of microRNA-200 were 
related to reduced survival and high expression of microRNA-200 was predictive of
benefit from radiotheraphy. MicroRNA-200 was associated with ER positive status, 
and inversely correlated to HER2 and overactivation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, that
was associated with high ZEB1 mRNA expression. Our findings suggest that the
stability of microRNAs makes them suitable as clinical markers and that the
EMT-related microRNA-200-ZEB-E-cadherin signaling pathway is connected to
established clinical characteristics and can give useful prognostic and
treatment-predictive information in progressive breast and colorectal cancers.

PMCID: PMC3869924
PMID: 24376848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Jun;115(6):1033-42. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24754.

Down regulation of miR200c promotes radiation-induced thymic lymphoma by
targeting BMI1.

Cui J(1), Cheng Y, Zhang P, Sun M, Gao F, Liu C, Cai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Second Military Medical University, Xiangyin
Road, Shanghai, 200433, PR China.

The miR-200c has recently been implicated in the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process by directly target the EMT related transcriptional
factors ZEB1 and ZEB2. The expression of this miRNA is inversely correlated with 
tumorgenecity and invasiveness in several human cancers. However, little is known
about the expression and targets of the miR-200c in radiation carcinogenesis.
Here in this study, using a split radiation induced thymic lymphoma (RITL) model 
in BALB/c mice, we found that miR-200c is down-regulated in RITL samples. Cell
death and apoptosis in lymphoma cells was induced by miR-200c mimic while
decreased by miR-200c inhibitor. Computational analysis found a putative target
site of miR-200c in the 3'UTR of one of the polycomb group (PcG) protein BMI1
mRNA, which was verified by a luciferase reporter assay. Forced over-expression
of miR-200c decreased the level of BMI1 protein and moreover, over-expression of 
BMI1 rescued the biological effects of miR-200c, indicating BMI1 is a direct
mediator of miR-200c functions. Furthermore, the BMI1 expression level was
up-regulated and inversely correlated with miR-200c in RITL samples. Finally, our
data also indicates that Adenovirus over-expression of pre-miR-200c reduced
tumorgenesis in vivo. Taken together, we conclude that down-regulated expression 
of miR-200c and up-regulation of its direct target BMI1 in radiation-induced
thymic lymphoma, which may indicate a novel therapeutic method for RITL through
induction of miR-200c or inhibition of BMI1.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24375660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 14;289(7):4116-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.533505. Epub 2013 
Dec 26.

The ZEB1 transcription factor acts in a negative feedback loop with miR200
downstream of Ras and Rb1 to regulate Bmi1 expression.

Liu Y(1), Sánchez-Tilló E, Lu X, Huang L, Clem B, Telang S, Jenson AB,
Cuatrecasas M, Chesney J, Postigo A, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Targets Program, James Brown Cancer Center.

Ras mutations are frequent in cancer cells where they drive proliferation and
resistance to apoptosis. However in primary cells, mutant Ras instead can cause
oncogene-induced senescence, a tumor suppressor function linked to repression of 
the polycomb factor Bmi1, which normally regulates cell cycle inhibitory
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (cdki). It is unclear how Ras causes
repression of Bmi1 in primary cells to suppress tumor formation while inducing
the gene in cancer cells to drive tumor progression. Ras also induces the EMT
transcription factor ZEB1 to trigger tumor invasion and metastasis. Beyond its
well-documented role in EMT, ZEB1 is important for maintaining repression of
cdki. Indeed, heterozygous mutation of ZEB1 is sufficient for elevated cdki
expression, leading to premature senescence of primary cells. A similar phenotype
is evident with Bmi1 mutation. We show that activation of Rb1 in response to
mutant Ras causes dominant repression of ZEB1 in primary cells, but loss of the
Rb1 pathway is a hallmark of cancer cells and in the absence of such Rb1
repression Ras induces ZEB1 in cancer cells. ZEB1 represses miR-200 in the
context of a mutual repression loop. Because miR-200 represses Bmi1, induction of
ZEB1 leads to induction of Bmi1. Rb1 pathway status then dictates the opposing
effects of mutant Ras on the ZEB1-miR-200 loop in primary versus cancer cells.
This loop not only triggers EMT, surprisingly we show it acts downstream of Ras
to regulate Bmi1 expression and thus the critical decision between
oncogene-induced senescence and tumor initiation.

PMCID: PMC3924277
PMID: 24371144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Jan 15;189(2):139-48. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201307-1355OC.

Effects of a functional variant c.353T>C in snai1 on risk of two contextual
diseases. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancer.

Yang L(1), Yang X, Ji W, Deng J, Qiu F, Yang R, Fang W, Zhang L, Huang D, Xie C, 
Zhang H, Zhong N, Ran P, Zhou Y, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)1 The State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, The Institute for Chemical
Carcinogenesis, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Diseases, and.

RATIONALE: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a key role in the
development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and lung cancer.
OBJECTIVES: There are five major EMT regulatory genes (Snai1, Slug, Zeb1, Zeb2,
and Twist1) involved in EMT. We hypothesized that germline variants in these
genes may influence the development of both diseases.
METHODS: Seven genetic variants were genotyped in two two-stage case-control
studies with 2,072 lung cancer cases and 2,077 control subjects, and 1,791
patients with COPD and 1,940 control subjects to show their associations with
development of both diseases.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: An exon variant c.353T>C(p.Val118Ala) of Snai1
harbored decreased risks of lung cancer (CT/CC vs. TT: odds ratio [OR], 0.76; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.65-0.90) and COPD (CC vs. CT vs. TT: OR, 0.75; 95%
CI, 0.63-0.89), and c.353T>C affected lung cancer risk indirectly through COPD
(COPD accounted for 6.78% of effect that the variant had on lung cancer).
Moreover, c.353T>C was correlated with lung cancer stages in smoking patients (P 
= 0.013), and those with the c.353C genotypes were less likely to have metastasis
at diagnosis than those with the c.353TT genotype (OR, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.41-0.88). 
The c.353C allele encoding p.118Ala attenuated Snai1's ability to up-regulate
mesenchymal biomarkers (i.e., fibronectin and vimentin) expression, and to
promote EMT-like changes, including morphologic changes, cell migration, and
invasion. However, these effects were not observed for the other variants.
CONCLUSIONS: The functional germline variant c.353T>C (p.Val118Ala) of Snai1
confers consistently decreased risks of lung cancer and COPD, and this variant
affects lung cancer risk through a mediation effect of COPD.

PMID: 24354880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Feb 15;20(4):878-89. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1844.
Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Integrated microRNA network analyses identify a poor-prognosis subtype of gastric
cancer characterized by the miR-200 family.

Song F(1), Yang D, Liu B, Guo Y, Zheng H, Li L, Wang T, Yu J, Zhao Y, Niu R,
Liang H, Winkler H, Zhang W, Hao X, Chen K.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Immunology, and Gastric Cancer, TMUCIH-J&J Joint Laboratory, Key Laboratory of
Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin, National Clinical Research Center of
Cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital; Department of
Gastroenterology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, PR China;
Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas; and Janssen Research and Development, a Division of Janssen
Pharmaceutica, Beerse, Belgium.

PURPOSE: Our aim was to investigate whether microRNAs can predict the clinical
outcome of patients with gastric cancer. We used integrated analysis of microRNA 
and mRNA expression profiles to identify gastric cancer microRNA subtypes and
their underlying regulatory scenarios.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: MicroRNA-based gastric cancer subtypes were identified by
consensus clustering analysis of microRNA profiles of 90 gastric cancer tissues. 
Activated pathways in the subtypes were identified by gene expression profiles.
Further integrated analysis was conducted to model a microRNA regulatory network 
for each subtype. RNA and protein expression were analyzed by RT-PCR and tissue
microarray, respectively, in a cohort of 385 gastric cancer cases (including the 
90 cases for profiling) to validate the key microRNAs and targets in the network.
Both in vitro and in vivo experiments were carried out to further validate the
findings.
RESULTS: MicroRNA profiles of 90 gastric cancer cases identified two microRNA
subtypes significantly associated with survival. The poor-prognosis gastric
cancer microRNA subtype was characterized by overexpression of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers. This gastric cancer
"mesenchymal subtype" was further validated in a patient cohort comprising 385
cases. Integrated analysis identified a key microRNA regulatory network likely
driving the gastric cancer mesenchymal subtype. Three of the microRNAs (miR-200c,
miR-200b, and miR-125b) targeting the most genes in the network were
significantly associated with survival. Functional experiments demonstrated that 
miR-200b suppressed ZEB1, augmented E-cadherin, inhibited cell migration, and
suppressed tumor growth in a mouse model.
CONCLUSIONS: We have uncovered a key microRNA regulatory network that defines the
mesenchymal gastric cancer subtype significantly associated with poor overall
survival in gastric cancer.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 24352645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Vis. 2013 Dec 12;19:2508-16. eCollection 2013.

Genetic screen of African Americans with Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Minear MA(1), Li YJ(2), Rimmler J(1), Balajonda E(3), Watson S(1), Allingham
RR(3), Hauser MA(1), Klintworth GK(4), Afshari NA(5), Gregory SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
NC. (2)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC ; Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC. (3)Duke Eye Center, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC. (4)Duke Eye Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC ;
Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC. (5)Shiley
Eye Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA.

PURPOSE: Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a genetically
heterogeneous disorder that has been primarily studied in patients of European or
Asian ancestry. Given the sparse literature on African Americans with FECD, we
sought to characterize the genetic variation in three known FECD candidate genes 
in African American patients with FECD.
METHODS: Over an 8-year period, we enrolled 47 African American probands with
FECD. All participants were clinically examined with slit-lamp biomicroscopy, and
when corneal tissue specimens were available, histopathologic confirmation of the
clinical diagnosis was obtained. The coding regions of known FECD susceptibility 
genes collagen, type VIII, alpha 2 (COL8A2); solute carrier family 4, sodium
borate transporter, member 11 (SLC4A11); and zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1
(ZEB1 [also known as TCF8]) were Sanger sequenced in the 47 probands using DNA
isolated from blood samples.
RESULTS: Twenty-two coding variants were detected across the COL8A2, SLC4A11, and
ZEB1 genes; six were nonsynonymous variants. Three novel coding variants were
detected: a synonymous variant each in COL8A2 and SLC4A11 and one nonsynonymous
variant in ZEB1 (p.P559S), which is predicted to be benign and tolerated, thus
making its physiologic consequence uncertain.
CONCLUSIONS: Variation in the COL8A2, SLC4A11, and ZEB1 genes is present in only 
a small fraction of our African American cases and as such does not appear to
significantly contribute to the genetic risk of FECD in African Americans. This
observation is on par with findings from previous sequencing studies involving
European or Asian ancestry patients with FECD.

PMCID: PMC3859630
PMID: 24348007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cell Biol Int. 2014 Apr;38(4):452-61. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10223. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

Effect of downregulation of ZEB1 on vimentin expression, tumour migration and
tumourigenicity of melanoma B16F10 cells and CSCs.

Dou J(1), He X, Liu Y, Wang Y, Zhao F, Wang X, Chen D, Shi F, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology of Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing, 210009, China.

Zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a master regulator of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and has been implicated in primary
epithelial cancer biological processes, such as invasion and metastasis. However,
the role of ZEB1 in progression of melanoma and cancer stem cells (CSCs) remains 
obscure. In this study, the recombinant plasmids of t3 shRNAs targeting mouse
ZEB1 were constructed and transfected into melanoma B16F10 cells. The stable
transfected cells were selected and the characteristics of ZEB1 downregulated
B16F10 cells was assessed. The tumourigenicity of CD44(+) CD133(+) CSCs isolated 
from B16F10 cells stably transfected with the ZEB1-shRNA2 recombinant was also
assessed. ZEB1-shRNAs B16F10 showed a lower expression of ZEB1 and vimentin,
weaker migration, invasiveness, colony forming, and proliferation, and a lower
tumourigenicity than the control cells. The tumourigenicity of the ZEB1-shRNA2
CD44(+) CD133(+) CSCs was also inhibited. In conclusion, ZEB1-shRNA2-mediated
downregulation of ZEB1 expression in B16F10 cells and CSCs is involved in the
inhibition of the EMT process. ZEB1 may be a potential target in melanoma
targeted.

© 2013 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 24339410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 15;723:156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.12.004. Epub 
2013 Dec 12.

Acquisition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype and cancer stem
cell-like properties in cisplatin-resistant lung cancer cells through
AKT/ß-catenin/Snail signaling pathway.

Wang H(1), Zhang G(2), Zhang H(3), Zhang F(2), Zhou B(2), Ning F(2), Wang HS(2), 
Cai SH(4), Du J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
wanghao986118@163.com. (2)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy,
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 
China. (4)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: csh5689@sina.com. (5)Department of
Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: dujun@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Cisplatin is a first-line chemotherapeutic agent in the treatment of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but the therapeutic effect is disappointing, partly due
to drug resistance. Emerging evidence showed that chemoresistance associates with
acquisition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype and cancer stem 
cell-like properties. However, the underlying mechanism is not entirely clear. In
this study, we showed that cisplatin-resistant A549 cells (A549/CDDP) acquire EMT
phenotype associated with migratory and invasive capability. A549/CDDP cells also
displayed enhanced cancer stem cell-like properties. Increased expression of
transcription factor Snail, but not ZEB1, Slug and Twist, was observed in
A549/CDDP cells. Knockdown of Snail reversed EMT and significantly attenuated
migration, invasion and cancer stem cell-like properties of A549/CDDP cells.
Conversely, overexpressed Snail in A549 cells induced EMT and cancer stem
cell-like properties. Finally, we demonstrated that activated AKT signal leads to
increased ß-catenin expression and subsequently up-regulates Snail in A549/CDDP
cells. Taken together, these results revealed that AKT/ß-catenin/Snail signaling 
pathway is mechanistically associated with cancer stem cell-like properties and
EMT features of A549/CDDP cells, and thus, this pathway could be a novel target
for the treatment of NSCLC.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24333218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2512-22.

Loss of E-cadherin activates EGFR-MEK/ERK signaling, which promotes invasion via 
the ZEB1/MMP2 axis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Bae GY(1), Choi SJ, Lee JS, Jo J, Lee J, Kim J, Cha HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Loss of E-cadherin, a hallmark of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), can
significantly affect metastatic dissemination. However, the molecular mechanism
of EMT-associated metastatic dissemination by loss of E-cadherin still remains
unclear in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). In the present study, we show
that the knockdown of E-cadherin was sufficient to convert A549 NSCLC cells into 
mesenchymal type with the concurrent up-regulation of typical EMT inducers such
as ZEB1 and TWIST1. Interestingly, the EMT-induced cells by E-cadherin depletion 
facilitate invasion in a matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2)-dependent manner with 
aberrant activation of EGFR signaling. We demonstrated that the elevated
invasiveness was a result of the activated EGFR-MEK/ERK signaling, which in turn 
leads to ZEB1 dependent MMP2 induction. These results suggest that the
EGFR-MEK/ERK/ZEB1/MMP2 axis is responsible for promoted invasion in EMT-induced
NSCLCs. Consistently, ERK activation and loss of E-cadherin were both observed in
the disseminating cancer cells at the invasive tumor fronts in NSCLS cancer
tissues. Thereby, these data suggest that the EGFR-MEK/ERK signaling would be a
promising molecular target to control aberrant MMP2 expression and consequent
invasion in the EMT-induced NSCSLs.

PMCID: PMC3926845
PMID: 24318272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Jun;69(2):319-25. doi: 10.1007/s12013-013-9801-7.

Tumor-suppressing effects of miR-141 in human osteosarcoma.

Xu H(1), Mei Q, Xiong C, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics of Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University, School of
Medicine, 305 Zhongshan East Road, Nanjing, 210002, China.

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignancy to arise from bone. The
pathogenesis of osteosarcoma is unclear, and new therapy molecular target is
needed. The miRNAs researched suggested that miRNAs are involved in the
pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. MiR-141, which belong to miR-200 family, take a
part in tumorigenesis. However, the role of miR-141 in the pathogenesis of
osteosarcoma remained unclear. In this study, we focused on the miR-141 in
osteosarcoma and found that the expression of miR-141 is lower in osteosarcoma.
Overexpression of miR-141 not only inhibits osteosarcoma cell proliferation but
also induces cell apoptosis. It is estimated that miR-141 played its role via
ZEB1 and ZEB2. In all, miR-141 played a osteosarcoma-suppressing role via ZEB1
and ZEB2. Our finding may elucidate the miRNAs mechanism in osteosarcoma and
provide a new molecule target for osteosarcoma therapy.

PMID: 24307282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Virchows Arch. 2014 Feb;464(2):213-20. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1518-x. Epub 2013 
Dec 4.

Expression of miRNAs and ZEB1 and ZEB2 correlates with histopathological grade in
papillary urothelial tumors of the urinary bladder.

Lee H(1), Jun SY, Lee YS, Lee HJ, Lee WS, Park CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

Histopathological grading of papillary urothelial tumors (PUTs) of the urinary
bladder is subjective and poorly reproducible. We investigated the relationship
between the expression of frequently deregulated microRNAs (miRNAs) as well as
their target genes (ZEB1/ZEB2) and bladder cancer histopathological grade in an
attempt to find a miRNA that might allow more reliable grading of PUTs. We
measured the expression levels of four miRNAs (miR-145, miR-205, miR-125b, and
miR-200c) in 120 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded bladder tumor tissue samples
using real-time PCR assays. ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression was assessed in the same
bladder tissues by immunohistochemistry. MiR-205 distinguished low-grade
papillary urothelial carcinoma (LG) from high-grade papillary urothelial
carcinoma (HG), and miR-145 distinguished HG from infiltrating carcinoma (CA)
with an area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.992 and 
0.997, respectively (sensitivity/specificity of 95.8/96.7 % and 100/91.7 %,
respectively; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The expression level of miR-125b was significantly lower
in LG than in PUNLMP, with an AUC value of 0.870 (93.3 % sensitivity and 84.2 %
specificity; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). ZEB1 immunoreactivity was more frequently detected in HG 
than in LG (57 % vs 13 %, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and in HG than in CA (57 % vs 17 %,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). ZEB2 immunoreactivity was more frequent in CA than in HG (83 % vs
54 %, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). ZEB1/ZEB2 and miRNAs expression seems to reliably distinguish
between different grades of PUTs of the urinary bladder. They might well serve as
useful complementary diagnostic biomarkers for grading of papillary urothelial
tumors.

PMID: 24306957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 15;74(2):520-31. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2182. Epub
2013 Dec 4.

CUL4A induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and promotes cancer metastasis by
regulating ZEB1 expression.

Wang Y(1), Wen M, Kwon Y, Xu Y, Liu Y, Zhang P, He X, Wang Q, Huang Y, Jen KY,
LaBarge MA, You L, Kogan SC, Gray JW, Mao JH, Wei G.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Human Anatomy and Key Laboratory of
Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Shandong University School of Medicine; Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan; International
Biotechnology R&D Center, Shandong University School of Ocean, Weihai, Shandong, 
China; Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley;
Department of Pathology; Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of Surgery;
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Laboratory
Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California;
and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, Oregon.

The ubiquitin ligase CUL4A has been implicated in tumorigenesis, but its
contributions to progression and metastasis have not been evaluated. Here, we
show that CUL4A is elevated in breast cancer as well as in ovarian, gastric, and 
colorectal tumors in which its expression level correlates positively with
distant metastasis. CUL4A overexpression in normal or malignant human mammary
epithelial cells increased their neoplastic properties in vitro and in vivo,
markedly increasing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the metastatic
capacity of malignant cells. In contrast, silencing CUL4A in aggressive breast
cancer cells inhibited these processes. Mechanistically, we found that CUL4A
modulated histone H3K4me3 at the promoter of the EMT regulatory gene ZEB1 in a
manner associated with its transcription. ZEB1 silencing blocked CUL4A-driven
proliferation, EMT, tumorigenesis, and metastasis. Furthermore, in human breast
cancers, ZEB1 expression correlated positively with CUL4A expression and distant 
metastasis. Taken together, our findings reveal a pivotal role of CUL4A in
regulating the metastatic behavior of breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3934357
PMID: 24305877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. BMC Cancer. 2013 Dec 5;13:572. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-572.

Clinical implication of ZEB-1 and E-cadherin expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC).

Hashiguchi M(1), Ueno S, Sakoda M, Iino S, Hiwatashi K, Minami K, Ando K, Mataki 
Y, Maemura K, Shinchi H, Ishigami S, Natsugoe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery, Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Kagoshima
University Graduate School of Medicine and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
ueno1@m.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: While recent research has shown that expression of ZEB-1 in a variety
of tumors has a crucial impact on patient survival, there is little information
regarding ZEB-1 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). This study
investigated the co-expression of ZEB-1 and E-cadherin in HCC by
immunohistochemistry and evaluated its association with clinical factors,
including patient prognosis.
METHODS: A total of 108 patients with primary HCC treated by curative hepatectomy
were enrolled. ZEB-1 expression was immunohistochemically categorized as positive
if at least 1% cancer cells exhibited nuclear staining. E-cadherin expression was
divided into preserved and reduced expression groups and correlations between
ZEB-1 and E-cadherin expression and clinical factors were then evaluated.
RESULTS: With respect to ZEB-1 expression, 23 patients were classified into the
positive group and 85 into the negative group. Reduced E-cadherin expression was 
seen in 44 patients and preserved expression in the remaining 64 patients. ZEB-1 
positivity was significantly associated with reduced expression of E-cadherin
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.027). Moreover, significant associations were found between ZEB-1
expression and venous invasion and TNM stage. ZEB-1 positivity was associated
with poorer prognosis (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025). Reduced E-cadherin expression was
significantly associated with intrahepatic metastasis and poorer prognosis
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.047). In particular, patients with both ZEB-1 positivity and reduced
E-cadherin expression had a poorer prognosis (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). Regardless of
E-cadherin status, ZEB-1 was not a significant prognostic factor by multivariate 
analysis. There was no statistical difference in overall survival when E-cadherin
expression was reduced in the ZEB-1 positive group (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.24).
CONCLUSIONS: Positive ZEB-1 expression and loss of E-cadherin expression are
correlated with poor prognosis in HCC patients and malignancy of ZEB-1 positive
tumors involves EMT.

PMCID: PMC4235016
PMID: 24304617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. APMIS. 2014 Jun;122(6):530-8. doi: 10.1111/apm.12187. Epub 2013 Dec 5.

A survey of zeb1, twist and claudin 1 and 4 expression during placental
development and disease.

Pirinen E(1), Soini Y.

Author information: 
(1)Imaging Center, Clinical Pathology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio,
Finland.

We investigated zeb1, twist and claudins 1 and 4 in normal and diseased placental
tissues. Eighty cases of placental tissues from all three trimesters and from
different diseases were studied immunohistochemically to determine the expression
of zeb1, twist and claudins 1 and 4. Zeb1 was more strongly expressed in
endothelial and mesenchymal cells of the villous structures during the last two
trimesters, suggesting that it plays a role in the development of placental blood
vessels. In contrast, twist was more strongly expressed in the trophoblastic
cells during these trimesters. The endothelial and stromal expression of zeb1 and
the epithelial expression of twist were disturbed in those placentas with
chromosomal aberrations. Claudin 4 was strongly expressed in trophoblastic cells 
during all trimesters. Its expression was especially strong in molar disease,
suggesting that it could participate in trophoblastic aggregation and disturbed
attachment of trophoblastic cells in the expanded villi. Claudin 4 expression was
also increased in the placentas of diabetic mothers and in toxaemia. Claudin 1
did not show any specific disease associations. The study implicates that twist
and zeb1 are involved in placental maturation, whereas claudin 4 appears to be
connected with placental diseases such as diabetes, toxaemia or molar disease.

© 2013 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24304426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):589-96. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2876. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Mesenchymal phenotype after chemotherapy is associated with chemoresistance and
poor clinical outcome in esophageal cancer.

Hara J(1), Miyata H(1), Yamasaki M(1), Sugimura K(1), Takahashi T(1), Kurokawa
Y(1), Nakajima K(1), Takiguchi S(1), Mori M(1), Doki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The relationship between the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
resistance to anticancer treatment has attracted attention in recent years.
However, to date, there is no direct clinical evidence for a link between the
mesenchymal phenotype and chemoresistance in human malignancies. The expression
of EMT-related markers, including E-cadherin, Snail, vimentin, ZEB1, ß-catenin
and N-cadherin was examined immunohistochemically in 185 tissue samples from
patients with esophageal cancer (including 93 patients who received preoperative 
chemotherapy followed by surgery and 92 patients who underwent surgery without
preoperative therapy). The relationship between the expression of the above
markers and clinical outcome including prognosis and response to chemotherapy was
also examined. The expression of E-cadherin, a marker of epithelial cells, was
significantly lower in residual tumors than chemo-naive tumors (P=0.003). The
expression of Snail (P=0.028), ZEB1 (P<0.001) and N-cadherin (P=0.001), markers
of mesenchymal cells, was higher in residual tumors than in chemonaive tumors.
The expression of E-cadherin correlated inversely with that of Snail (P<0.001).
Reduced expression of E-cadherin and increased expression of Snail in residual
tumors from patients who received chemotherapy correlated significantly with poor
response to chemotherapy and short survival time. Multivariate analysis
identified Snail expression as an independent prognostic factor, along with tumor
depth, in patients who received preoperative chemotherapy for esophageal cancer. 
The results suggest transition of residual esophageal cancer cells to mesenchymal
phenotype after chemotherapy and this contributes to resistance to chemotherapy
and poor prognosis in patients with esophageal cancer.

PMID: 24297447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Nov 27;15(6):R113. doi: 10.1186/bcr3580.

Direct repression of MYB by ZEB1 suppresses proliferation and epithelial gene
expression during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells.

Hugo HJ, Pereira L, Suryadinata R, Drabsch Y, Gonda TJ, Gunasinghe NP, Pinto C,
Soo ET, van Denderen BJ, Hill P, Ramsay RG, Sarcevic B, Newgreen DF, Thompson EW.

INTRODUCTION: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) promotes cell migration 
and is important in metastasis. Cellular proliferation is often downregulated
during EMT, and the reverse transition (MET) in metastases appears to be required
for restoration of proliferation in secondary tumors. We studied the interplay
between EMT and proliferation control by MYB in breast cancer cells.
METHODS: MYB, ZEB1, and CDH1 expression levels were manipulated by lentiviral
small-hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown/overexpression, and verified with
Western blotting, immunocytochemistry, and qRT-PCR. Proliferation was assessed
with bromodeoxyuridine pulse labeling and flow cytometry, and sulforhodamine B
assays. EMT was induced with epidermal growth factor for 9 days or by exposure to
hypoxia (1% oxygen) for up to 5 days, and assessed with qRT-PCR, cell morphology,
and colony morphology. Protein expression in human breast cancers was assessed
with immunohistochemistry. ZEB1-MYB promoter binding and repression were
determined with Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assay and a luciferase reporter
assay, respectively. Student paired t tests, Mann-Whitney, and repeated measures 
two-way ANOVA tests determined statistical significance (P < 0.05).
RESULTS: Parental PMC42-ET cells displayed higher expression of ZEB1 and lower
expression of MYB than did the PMC42-LA epithelial variant. Knockdown of ZEB1 in 
PMC42-ET and MDA-MB-231 cells caused increased expression of MYB and a transition
to a more epithelial phenotype, which in PMC42-ET cells was coupled with
increased proliferation. Indeed, we observed an inverse relation between MYB and 
ZEB1 expression in two in vitro EMT cell models, in matched human breast tumors
and lymph node metastases, and in human breast cancer cell lines. Knockdown of
MYB in PMC42-LA cells (MYBsh-LA) led to morphologic changes and protein
expression consistent with an EMT. ZEB1 expression was raised in MYBsh-LA cells
and significantly repressed in MYB-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells, which also
showed reduced random migration and a shift from mesenchymal to epithelial colony
morphology in two dimensional monolayer cultures. Finally, we detected binding of
ZEB1 to MYB promoter in PMC42-ET cells, and ZEB1 overexpression repressed MYB
promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: This work identifies ZEB1 as a transcriptional repressor of MYB and 
suggests a reciprocal MYB-ZEB1 repressive relation, providing a mechanism through
which proliferation and the epithelial phenotype may be coordinately modulated in
breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3979034
PMID: 24283570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Respir Res. 2013 Nov 1;14:118. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-118.

IL-22 contributes to TGF-ß1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
asthmatic bronchial epithelial cells.

Johnson JR(1), Nishioka M, Chakir J, Risse PA, Almaghlouth I, Bazarbashi AN,
Plante S, Martin JG, Eidelman D, Hamid Q.

Author information: 
(1)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University, 3626 St, Urbain Street,
Montréal, QC H2X 2P2, Canada. qutayba.hamid@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Allergic asthma is characterized by airway inflammation in response
to antigen exposure, leading to airway remodeling and lung dysfunction.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may play a role in airway remodeling
through the acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype in airway epithelial cells.
TGF-ß1 is known to promote EMT; however, other cytokines expressed in severe
asthma with extensive remodeling, such as IL-22, may also contribute to this
process. In this study, we evaluated the contribution of IL-22 to EMT in primary 
bronchial epithelial cells from healthy and asthmatic subjects.
METHODS: Primary bronchial epithelial cells were isolated from healthy subjects, 
mild asthmatics and severe asthmatics (n=5 patients per group). The mRNA and
protein expression of epithelial and mesenchymal cell markers and EMT-associated 
transcription factors was evaluated following stimulation with TGF-ß1, IL-22 and 
TGF-ß1+IL-22.
RESULTS: Primary bronchial epithelial cells stimulated with TGF-ß1 underwent EMT,
demonstrated by decreased expression of epithelial markers (E-cadherin and
MUC5AC) and increased expression of mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin and vimentin)
and EMT-associated transcription factors. IL-22 alone had no effect on epithelial
or mesenchymal gene expression. However, IL-22+TGF-ß1 promoted the expression of 
some EMT transcription factors (Snail1 and Zeb1) and led to a more profound
cadherin shift, but only in cells obtained from severe asthmatics.
CONCLUSION: The impact of IL-22 on airway epithelial cells depends on the
cytokine milieu and the clinical phenotype of the patient. Further studies are
required to determine the molecular mechanism of IL-22 and TGF-ß1 cooperativity
in driving EMT in primary human bronchial epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4176096
PMID: 24283210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;34(3):533-50. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01043-13. Epub 2013 Nov
25.

A p21-ZEB1 complex inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition through the
microRNA 183-96-182 cluster.

Li XL(1), Hara T, Choi Y, Subramanian M, Francis P, Bilke S, Walker RL, Pineda M,
Zhu Y, Yang Y, Luo J, Wakefield LM, Brabletz T, Park BH, Sharma S, Chowdhury D,
Meltzer PS, Lal A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The tumor suppressor p21 acts as a cell cycle inhibitor and has also been shown
to regulate gene expression by functioning as a transcription corepressor. Here, 
we identified p21-regulated microRNAs (miRNAs) by sequencing small RNAs from
isogenic p21(+/+) and p21(-/-) cells. Three abundant miRNA clusters,
miR-200b-200a-429, miR-200c-141, and miR-183-96-182, were downregulated in
p21-deficient cells. Consistent with the known function of the miR-200 family and
p21 in inhibition of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we observed EMT
upon loss of p21 in multiple model systems. To explore a role of the
miR-183-96-182 cluster in EMT, we identified its genome-wide targets and found
that miR-183 and miR-96 repressed common targets, including SLUG, ZEB1, ITGB1,
and KLF4. Reintroduction of miR-200, miR-183, or miR-96 in p21(-/-) cells
inhibited EMT, cell migration, and invasion. Conversely, antagonizing miR-200 and
miR-183-96-182 cluster miRNAs in p21(+/+) cells increased invasion and elevated
the levels of VIM, ZEB1, and SLUG mRNAs. Furthermore, we found that p21 forms a
complex with ZEB1 at the miR-183-96-182 cluster promoter to inhibit
transcriptional repression of this cluster by ZEB1, suggesting a reciprocal
feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC3911499
PMID: 24277930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014 Feb;23(2):234-54. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-0785. Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Molecular biomarkers of cancer stem/progenitor cells associated with progression,
metastases, and treatment resistance of aggressive cancers.

Mimeault M(1), Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fred &
Pamela Buffet Cancer Center, Eppley Cancer Institute, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.

The validation of novel diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive biomarkers and
therapeutic targets in tumor cells is of critical importance for optimizing the
choice and efficacy of personalized therapies. Importantly, recent advances have 
led to the identification of gene-expression signatures in cancer cells,
including cancer stem/progenitor cells, in the primary tumors, exosomes,
circulating tumor cells (CTC), and disseminated cancer cells at distant
metastatic sites. The gene-expression signatures may help to improve the accuracy
of diagnosis and predict the therapeutic responses and overall survival of
patients with cancer. Potential biomarkers in cancer cells include stem cell-like
markers [CD133, aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), CD44, and CD24], growth factors,
and their cognate receptors [epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), EGFRvIII,
and HER2], molecules associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT;
vimentin, N-cadherin, snail, twist, and Zeb1), regulators of altered metabolism
(phosphatidylinositol-3' kinase/Akt/mTOR), and drug resistance (multidrug
transporters and macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1). Moreover, different
pluripotency-associated transcription factors (Oct3/4, Nanog, Sox2, and Myc) and 
microRNAs that are involved in the epigenetic reprogramming and acquisition of
stem cell-like properties by cancer cells during cancer progression may also be
exploited as molecular biomarkers to predict the risk of metastases, systemic
treatment resistance, and disease relapse of patients with cancer.

PMCID: PMC3977531
PMID: 24273063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Dec 6;442(1-2):133-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.031. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

The transcription factor LEF-1 induces an epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
MDCK cells independent of ß-catenin.

Kobayashi W(1), Ozawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima
890-8544, Japan.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a key process in the tumor
metastatic cascade, is characterized by the loss of cell-cell junctions and cell 
polarity, as well as the acquisition of migratory and invasive properties. LEF-1 
is a member of the lymphoid enhancer-binding factor/T-cell factor (LEF/TCF)
family of DNA-binding transcription factors, which interact with nuclear
ß-catenin and act as central transcriptional mediators of Wnt signaling. To
investigate the role of LEF-1 in EMT, we generated stable LEF-1 transfectants
using MDCK cells. The transfectants had a spindle-shaped mesenchymal morphology, 
and enhanced migration and invasiveness relative to control cells. These EMT
changes were accompanied by the downregulation of an epithelial marker protein,
E-cadherin, and the upregulation of mesenchymal marker proteins, vimentin and
N-cadherin. Consistent with these observations, the mRNA levels of Slug, ZEB1,
and ZEB2-EMT-related transcription factors-increased significantly. Although the 
N-terminally deleted mutant LEF-1 cannot interact with ß-catenin, it retained the
ability to induce EMT. Consistent with these observations, neither the expression
of a dominant negative ß-catenin/engrailed chimera, nor the expression of a
cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin that sequesters ß-catenin from binding to
LEF/TCF, reversed LEF-1-induced EMT. Together, these data indicated that the
nuclear function of ß-catenin was not necessary for the induction of Slug, ZEB1, 
and ZEB2 expression leading to EMT.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2014;50(5):399-405. doi: 10.1007/s11626-013-9712-3. 
Epub 2013 Nov 21.

Upregulation of GM-CSF by TGF-ß1 in epithelial mesenchymal transition of human
HERS/ERM cells.

Lee JH(1), Nam H, Um S, Lee J, Lee G, Seo BM.

Author information: 
(1)Biotooth Engineering Lab, Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School
of Dentistry, Craniomaxillofacial Life Science, Dental Research Institute, Seoul 
National University, Seoul, South Korea.

Hertwig's epithelial root sheath/epithelial rests of Malassez (HERS/ERM) have
been suggested to play an important role in tooth root formation, particularly in
periodontal development. Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been
suggested to contribute to root development in tooth. However, the mechanism of
interaction between HERS/ERM cells and dental mesenchymal cells has not been
fully understood. In this study, we investigated the effect of exogenous
transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-ß1) in human HERS/ERM cells in order to
verify the role of granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in
EMT process. Antibody array was used to screen secretion factors by exogenous
TGF-ß1. Secretion of GM-CSF was increased by exogenous TGF-ß1. Expression levels 
of EMT markers, vimentin, ZEB1 (zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1), and
E-cadherin, were confirmed using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
and immunocytochemistry. Treatment with GM-CSF increased the expression of
vimentin and ZEB1, similar to TGF-ß1 treatment, and decreased the expression of
E-cadherin. Our results suggest that GM-CSF could induce EMT in human HERS/ERM
cells.

PMID: 24258001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2013 Oct;23(8):1357-66. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e3182a5e760.

Effect of down-regulated transcriptional repressor ZEB1 on the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of ovarian cancer cells.

Chen D(1), Wang J, Zhang Y, Chen J, Yang C, Cao W, Zhang H, Liu Y, Dou J.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology of Medical College, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China; Department of Microbiology, Bengbu Medical School,
Bengbu, PR China; and Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Zhongda Hospital,
Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Progress has been made against early events of malignant
transformation and drug resistance associated with epithelial ovarian cancer;
uncontrolled metastases, however, still accounts for most patient deaths. The
molecular mechanism that regulates the process of epithelial ovarian cancer
metastases is not yet clearly understood. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the effect of down-regulating the transcriptional repressor
zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) on an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of human ovarian cancer SKOV3 cell line in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: The human ovarian cancer cells SKOV3 and HO8910 were transfected with an
expression vector-based small hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting ZEB1 (shZEB1), and
the stably transfected cells were selected. Colony-forming, wound-healing, and
cellular migration assays were respectively used. The tumorigenicity of
shZEB1-SKOV3 was also evaluated in mice.
RESULTS: The shZEB1-SKOV3 and shZEB1-HO8910 cells showed a lower level of ZEB1
expression and weaker cell migration than the control cells. Moreover,
down-regulating ZEB1 expression with shRNA in the cells enhanced the expression
of miR-200c that acted as a tumor suppressor to inhibit the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of shZEB1-SKOV3 cells and to block shZEB1-SKOV3
cell metastasis in vivo. The shRNA-mediated down-regulation ZEB1 in SKOV3 cells
significantly decreased the tumor growth in the xenograft mice.
CONCLUSION: The shZEB1-mediated down-regulation of the ZEB1 expression in the
SKOV3 cells may be considered for future clinical trials.

PMID: 24257549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 13;33(46):5319-31. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.476. Epub 2013 Nov
18.

Protumorigenic effects of mir-145 loss in malignant pleural mesothelioma.

Cioce M(1), Ganci F(2), Canu V(2), Sacconi A(2), Mori F(3), Canino C(1), Korita
E(2), Casini B(4), Alessandrini G(5), Cambria A(6), Carosi MA(4), Blandino R(6), 
Panebianco V(6), Facciolo F(5), Visca P(4), Volinia S(7), Muti P(8), Strano S(3),
Croce CM(7), Pass HI(1), Blandino G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA. (2)Translational Oncogenomic Unit, Italian National Cancer Institute
'Regina Elena', Rome, Italy. (3)Molecular Chemoprevention Group, Italian National
Cancer Institute 'Regina Elena', Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Pathology Italian 
National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy. (5)Unit of Thoracic Surgery, Regina Elena
National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy. (6)Department of Surgical Oncology San
Vincenzo Hospital, Taormina, Italy. (7)Department of Molecular Virology,
Immunology and Medical Genetics and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA. (8)Department of Oncology, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada.

We identified a discrete number of microRNAs differentially expressed in benign
or malignant mesothelial tissues. We focused on mir-145 whose levels were
significantly downregulated in malignant mesothelial tissues and malignant
pleural mesothelioma (MPM) cell lines as compared to benign tissues (pleura,
peritoneum or cysts). We show that promoter hyper-methylation caused very low
levels in MPM cell lines and specimens. Treatment of MPM cell lines with mir-145 
agonists negatively modulated some protumorigenic properties of MPM cells, such
as clonogenicity, cell migration and resistance to pemetrexed treatment. The main
effector mechanism of the clonogenic death induced by mir-145 was that of
accelerated senescence. We found that mir-145 targeted OCT4 via specific binding 
to its 3'-UTR. Increased intracellular levels of mir-145 decreased the levels of 
OCT4 and its target gene ZEB1, thereby counteracting the increase of OCT4 induced
by pemetrexed treatment which is known to favor the development of chemoresistant
cells. In line with this, reintroduction of OCT4 into mimic-145 treated cells
counteracted the effects on clonogenicity and replicative senescence. This
further supports the relevance of the mir-145-OCT4 interaction for the survival
of MPM cells. The potential use of mir-145 expression levels to classify benign
vs malignant mesothelial tissues and the differences between pemetrexed-induced
senescence and that induced by the re-expression of mir-145 are discussed.

PMCID: PMC4687459
PMID: 24240684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Cancers (Basel). 2013 Nov 8;5(4):1504-21. doi: 10.3390/cancers5041504.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) Signaling Capacity and the
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC):
Implications for Use of 1,25(OH)2D3 in NSCLC Treatment.

Upadhyay SK(1), Verone A, Shoemaker S, Qin M, Liu S, Campbell M, Hershberger PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.
pamela.hershberger@roswellpark.org.

1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) exerts anti-proliferative activity by
binding to the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and regulating gene expression. We
previously reported that non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells which harbor
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations display elevated VDR expression
(VDRhigh) and are vitamin D-sensitive. Conversely, those with K-ras mutations are
VDRlow and vitamin D-refractory. Because EGFR mutations are found predominately
in NSCLC cells with an epithelial phenotype and K-ras mutations are more common
in cells with a mesenchymal phenotype, we investigated the relationship between
vitamin D signaling capacity and the epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Using NSCLC cell lines and publically available lung cancer cell line microarray 
data, we identified a relationship between VDR expression, 1,25(OH)2D3
sensitivity, and EMT phenotype. Further, we discovered that 1,25(OH)2D3 induces
E-cadherin and decreases EMT-related molecules SNAIL, ZEB1, and vimentin in NSCLC
cells. 1,25(OH)2D3-mediated changes in gene expression are associated with a
significant decrease in cell migration and maintenance of epithelial morphology. 
These data indicate that 1,25(OH)2D3 opposes EMT in NSCLC cells. Because EMT is
associated with increased migration, invasion, and chemoresistance, our data
imply that 1,25(OH)2D3 may prevent lung cancer progression in a molecularly
defined subset of NSCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC3875951
PMID: 24217116  [PubMed]


482. Cancers (Basel). 2013 Apr 3;5(2):334-56. doi: 10.3390/cancers5020334.

Global Decrease of Histone H3K27 Acetylation in ZEB1-Induced Epithelial to
Mesenchymal Transition in Lung Cancer Cells.

Roche J(1), Nasarre P, Gemmill R, Baldys A, Pontis J, Korch C, Guilhot J,
Ait-Si-Ali S, Drabkin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology Oncology Division, MUSC, 96 Jonathan Lucas 
St., Charleston, SC 29425, USA. joelle.roche@univ-poitiers.fr.

The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) enables epithelial cells with a
migratory mesenchymal phenotype. It is activated in cancer cells and is involved 
in invasion, metastasis and stem-like properties. ZEB1, an E-box binding
transcription factor, is a major suppressor of epithelial genes in lung cancer.
In the present study, we show that in H358 non-small cell lung cancer cells, ZEB1
downregulates EpCAM (coding for an epithelial cell adhesion molecule), ESRP1
(epithelial splicing regulatory protein), ST14 (a membrane associated serine
protease involved in HGF processing) and RAB25 (a small G-protein) by direct
binding to these genes. Following ZEB1 induction, acetylation of histone H4 and
histone H3 on lysine 9 (H3K9) and 27 (H3K27) was decreased on ZEB1 binding sites 
on these genes as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Of note,
decreased H3K27 acetylation could be also detected by western blot and
immunocytochemistry in ZEB1 induced cells. In lung cancers, H3K27 acetylation
level was higher in the tumor compartment than in the corresponding stroma where 
ZEB1 was more often expressed. Since HDAC and DNA methylation inhibitors
increased expression of ZEB1 target genes, targeting these epigenetic
modifications would be expected to reduce metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3730320
PMID: 24216980  [PubMed]


483. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 29;8(10):e78032. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078032.
eCollection 2013.

Fine-mapping an association of FSHR with preterm birth in a Finnish population.

Chun S(1), Plunkett J, Teramo K, Muglia LJ, Fay JC.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America.

Preterm birth is a complex disorder defined by gestations of less than 37 weeks. 
While preterm birth is estimated to have a significant genetic component,
relative few genes have been associated with preterm birth. Polymorphism in one
such gene, follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), has been associated with
preterm birth in Finnish and African American mothers but not other populations. 
To refine the genetic association of FSHR with preterm birth we conducted a
fine-mapping study at the FSHR locus in a Finnish cohort. We sequenced a total of
44 kb, including protein-coding and conserved non-coding regions, in 127 preterm 
and 135 term mothers. Overall, we identified 288 single nucleotide variants and
65 insertion/deletions of 1-2 bp across all subjects. While no common SNPs in
protein-coding regions were associated with preterm birth, including one
previously associated with timing of fertilization, multiple SNPs spanning the
first and second intron showed the strongest associations. Analysis of the
associated SNPs revealed that they form both a protective (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.50, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.25-0.93) as well as a risk (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.89, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.08-3.39) haplotype with 
independent effects. In these haplotypes, two SNPs, rs12052281 and rs72822025,
were predicted to disrupt ZEB1 and ELF3 transcription factor binding sites,
respectively. Our results show that multiple haplotypes at FSHR are associated
with preterm birth and we discuss the frequency and structure of these haplotypes
outside of the Finnish population as a potential explanation for the absence of
FSHR associations in some populations.

PMCID: PMC3812121
PMID: 24205076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Nov 7;4:e915. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.442.

An EMT spectrum defines an anoikis-resistant and spheroidogenic intermediate
mesenchymal state that is sensitive to e-cadherin restoration by a src-kinase
inhibitor, saracatinib (AZD0530).

Huang RY(1), Wong MK, Tan TZ, Kuay KT, Ng AH, Chung VY, Chu YS, Matsumura N, Lai 
HC, Lee YF, Sim WJ, Chai C, Pietschmann E, Mori S, Low JJ, Choolani M, Thiery JP.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, National University Hospital,
Singapore 119228, Singapore [2] Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117599.

The phenotypic transformation of well-differentiated epithelial carcinoma into a 
mesenchymal-like state provides cancer cells with the ability to disseminate
locally and to metastasise. Different degrees of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) have been found to occur in carcinomas from breast, colon and
ovarian carcinoma (OC), among others. Numerous studies have focused on bona fide 
epithelial and mesenchymal states but rarely on intermediate states. In this
study, we describe a model system for appraising the spectrum of EMT using 43
well-characterised OC cell lines. Phenotypic EMT characterisation reveals four
subgroups: Epithelial, Intermediate E, Intermediate M and Mesenchymal, which
represent different epithelial-mesenchymal compositions along the EMT spectrum.
In cell-based EMT-related functional studies, OC cells harbouring an Intermediate
M phenotype are characterised by high N-cadherin and ZEB1 expression and low
E-cadherin and ERBB3/HER3 expression and are more anoikis-resistant and
spheroidogenic. A specific Src-kinase inhibitor, Saracatinib (AZD0530), restores 
E-cadherin expression in Intermediate M cells in in vitro and in vivo models and 
abrogates spheroidogenesis. We show how a 33-gene EMT Signature can sub-classify 
an OC cohort into four EMT States correlating with progression-free survival
(PFS). We conclude that the characterisation of intermediate EMT states provides 
a new approach to better define EMT. The concept of the EMT Spectrum allows the
utilisation of EMT genes as predictive markers and the design and application of 
therapeutic targets for reversing EMT in a selective subgroup of patients.

PMCID: PMC3847320
PMID: 24201814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Cancer. 2014 Feb 1;120(3):363-72. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28418. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) protein induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Wang L(1), Tian WD, Xu X, Nie B, Lu J, Liu X, Zhang B, Dong Q, Sunwoo JB, Li G,
Li XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded EB nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1)
protein is required for maintenance and transmission of the viral episome in
EBV-infected cells. The objective of this study was to investigate the role of
EBNA1 protein in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
METHODS: Tissue samples from 48 patients with NPC and 12 patients with chronic
nasopharyngitis were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis of EBNA1
expression. EBNA1 combinational DNA was used to overexpress EBNA1 protein in NPC 
cell lines to assess tumor cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), colony
formation, migration and invasion, and gene expression.
RESULTS: EBNA1 protein was highly expressed in NPC tissue specimens, and its
expression was associated with NPC lymph node metastasis. EBNA1 expression
affected NPC cell morphology and the expression of EMT markers in vitro.
Furthermore, overexpression of EBNA1 inhibited the expression of microRNA 200a
(miR-200a) and miR-200b and, in turn, up-regulated expression of their target
genes, zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 ( ZEB1) and ZEB2, which are well
known mediators of EMT. In addition, EBNA1-regulated miR-200a and miR-200b
expression was mediated by transforming growth factor-ß1.
CONCLUSIONS: The current findings provided novel insight into the vital role of
EBNA1 in manipulating a molecular switch of EMT in EBV-positive NPC cells.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24190575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Oncogene. 2014 Oct 30;33(44):5183-92. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.461. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions induce prostate tumorigenesis by modulating microRNA
miR-200c.

Kim J(1), Wu L(1), Zhao JC(1), Jin HJ(1), Yu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)1] Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA [2] Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL,
USA.

Comment in
    Eur Urol. 2014 May;65(5):1011.

Chromosomal translocations that juxtapose the androgen-sensitive transmembrane
protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) gene promoter to the oncogenic ETS-family
transcription factor ERG result in excessive ERG overexpression in approximately 
50% of prostate cancer (PCa) patients. Although numerous studies have
investigated ERG-downstream genes, such studies have not attempted to examine
miRNAs, which however are emerging to be important regulators of cancer. Through 
bioinformatics analysis of ChIP-Seq ERG data and miRNA expression profiling data 
we nominated miR-200c as a direct target of ERG. Experimentation of PCa cells
with ERG overexpression or knockdown demonstrated that ERG directly repressed
miR-200c expression by physically binding to the erythroblast
transformation-specific (ETS) motif within its promoter. Consequently, miR-200c
was downregulated in ERG-positive PCa, and miR-200c target gene expression was
restored. In addition, the expression pattern of miR-200c target genes predicted 
ERG status in clinical PCa specimens. Furthermore, miR-200c was found to be
important in modulating ZEB1 upregulation by ERG. Most importantly, miR-200c
reconstitution fully reversed ERG-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), cell migration and invasion. Therefore, our study report miR-200c as the
first miRNA target of ERG and a critical inhibitor of PCa cell motility.
Therapeutic delivery of miR-200c may provide personalized treatment for patients 
with the molecular subtype of PCa that harbors TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions.

PMCID: PMC4009393
PMID: 24186205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Oncol Lett. 2013 Nov;6(5):1234-1240. Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Effect of AKT inhibition on epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
ZEB1-potentiated radiotherapy in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chen W(1), Wu S, Zhang G, Wang W, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Liver Disease Medicine, Pingxiang Hospital, Pingxiang, Jiangxi
337000, P.R. China.

Radiotherapy is a major treatment regime for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), and 
although initial responses to a complete course of radiation are good, recurrence
and metastasis are frequent events. A number of previous studies have observed
that ionizing radiation (IR) may enhance the migratory and invasive properties of
cancer cells through epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In the present
study, a tumor cohort of 22 NPC and 7 normal cases (chronic inflammation only)
were investigated and the expression of AKT was demonstrated to positively
correlate with the expression of ZEB1. Following treatment with IR, 7/10 patients
suffered recurrence and metastasis, in addition to high expression levels of
phosphorylated AKT (S473) and ZEB1. The AKT inhibitor, GSK690693, inhibited AKT, 
blocked the expression of ZEB1 and vimentin and restored the expression of
E-cadherin following IR, thus preventing the migration and EMT of the tumor
cells. In addition, the inhibition of AKT via GSK690693 was shown to markedly
increase the sensitivity of tumor cells to IR in vitro and in vivo. These
observations indicate that GSK690693 may aid in the prevention of recurrence and 
metastasis following IR therapy in NPC patients.

PMCID: PMC3813501
PMID: 24179501  [PubMed]


488. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jan;33(1):151-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1538. Epub 2013 Oct
30.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition is necessary for acquired resistance to
cisplatin and increases the metastatic potential of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
cells.

Zhang P(1), Liu H, Xia F, Zhang QW, Zhang YY, Zhao Q, Chao ZH, Jiang ZW, Jiang
CC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Bengbu Medical College, Anhui Engineering Technology
Research Center of Biochemical Pharmaceuticals, Bengbu, Anhui 233030, P.R. China.

Radiotherapy and adjuvant cisplatin (DDP) chemotherapy are standard approaches
used in the treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). However, resistance to
chemotherapy has recently become more common, resulting in the failure of this
combination therapy for NPC. The aim of the present study was to assess the
cellular morphology, motility and molecular changes in DDP-resistant NPC cells in
relation to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). CNE2 cells were continuously
exposed to increasing doses of DDP to establish a stable cell line resistant to
DDP (CNE2/DDP cells). The human NPC cell lines, HNE1, CNE2, HNE1/DDP and
CNE2/DDP, were used to examine the association between chemoresistance and the
acquisition of an EMT-like phenotype of cancer cells. The DDP-resistant cells
were less sensitive than the HNE1 cells to treatment with DDP, and were shown by 
a cell viability assay, western blot analysis and qRT-PCR to have acquired
chemoresistance. The HNE1/DDP cells examined by wound healing and Transwell
Boyden chamber assays exhibited an increased migration and invasion potential.
The DDP-resistant cells exhibited morphological and molecular changes consistent 
with EMT, as observed by western blot analysis and qRT-PCR. These changes
included becoming more spindle-like in shape, a loss of polarity and formation of
pseudopodia, the downregulation of E-cadherin and ß-catenin and the upregulation 
of vimentin, <U+FB01>bronectin and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9. Moreover, the
levels of the EMT-related transcription factors, Snail, Slug, Twist and zinc
finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), were higher in the DDP-resistant NPC
cells. These data suggest that the development of DDP resistance of NPC cells is 
accompanied by inducible EMT-like changes with an increased metastatic potential 
in vitro. Further elucidation of the association between resistance to DDP and
EMT may facilitate the future development of novel therapeutic approaches for the
treatment of chemoresistant tumors.

PMID: 24173500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2013 Nov;13(9):963-72.

The Role of Snail in EMT and Tumorigenesis.

Wang Y, Shi J, Chai K, Ying X, Zhou BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, and Markey Cancer Center, 
University of Kentucky School of Medicine, Lexington, KY, 40506, United States.
peter.zhou@uky.edu.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a highly conserved process in which
polarized, immobile epithelial cells lose tight junctions, associated adherence, 
and become migratory mesenchymal cells. Several transcription factors, including 
the Snail/Slug family, Twist, dEF1/ZEB1, SIP1/ZEB2 and E12/E47 respond to
microenvironmental stimuli and function as molecular switches for the EMT
program. Snail is a zinc-finger transcriptional repressor controlling EMT during 
embryogenesis and tumor progression. Through its N-terminal SNAG domain, Snail
interacts with several corepressors and epigenetic remodeling complexes to
repress specific target genes, such as the E-cadherin gene (CDH1). An integrated 
and complex signaling network, including the RTKs, TGF-ß, Notch, Wnt, TNF-a, and 
BMPs pathways, activates Snail, thereby inducing EMT. Snail expression correlates
with the tumor grade, nodal metastasis of many types of tumor and predicts a poor
outcome in patients with metastatic cancer. Emerging evidences indicate that
Snail causes a metabolic reprogramming, bestows tumor cells with cancer stem
cell-like traits, and additionally, promotes drug resistance, tumor recurrence
and metastasis. Despite many new and exciting developments, several challenges
remain to be addressed in order to understand more thoroughly the role of Snail
in metastasis. Additional investigations are required to disclose the
contribution of microenvironmental factors on tumor progression. This information
will lead to a comprehensive understanding of Snail in cancer and will provide us
with novel approaches for preventing and treating metastatic cancers.

PMCID: PMC4004763
PMID: 24168186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2013 Nov;13(9):996-1011.

Decoding the knots of initiation of oncogenic epithelial-mesenchymal transition
in tumor progression.

Guo P, Gao A, Zhang G, Han H, Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Soochow University, 199 Ren Ai Road, Suzhou
Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215123, China. quanshengzhou@yahoo.com.

Oncogenic epithelial-mesenchymal transition (oncEMT) plays important roles in the
genesis of cancer stem cells (CSCs), malignant tumor initiation and progression, 
cancer metastasis, and drug resistance. Although the role of oncEMT in
tumorigenesis has recently been extensively studied, the initiation of oncEMT is 
not clearly understood, and its mechanisms of action are still unknown. Emerging 
evidence suggests that oncEMT is a complex process, which involves multiple
endogenous and exogenous factors. Overexpression of several oncogenes and
reprogramming factors in precancerous and cancerous cells, including Ras, Myc,
Bmi-1, Oct4, Nanog, Slug, Twist, Zeb1, and Zeb2, may initiate oncEMT and
tumorigenesis. Defects in key tumor suppressors, such as p53, PTEN, CCN6 protein,
and p21 also are associated with oncEMT. MicroRNA (miRNA) may also play a role in
the oncEMT. Furthermore, exogenous factors, including chemical carcinogens,
viruses, radiation, hypoxia, and acidic microenvironment, can drive oncEMT.
Moreover, various growth factors derived from either malignant tumor cells or
tumor-associated non-tumor cells in the cancer microenvironment can promote
oncEMT. Together, the endogenous and exogenous factors, as well as a hostile
cancer microenvironment, initiate the oncEMT program through diverse signaling
pathways and networks. However, the dynamic process of initiating oncEMT and the 
mechanisms are still incompletely understood. Further characterization of the
dynamics and mechanisms of the oncEMT will provide new insights into oncogenesis,
as well as identify specific oncEMT markers and targets for early diagnosis of
cancer and novel anti-cancer drug discovery.

PMID: 24168183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Feb;44(2):553-60. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343681. Epub 2013 Dec
2.

Langerhans cell maturation is accompanied by induction of N-cadherin and the
transcriptional regulators of epithelial-mesenchymal transition ZEB1/2.

Konradi S(1), Yasmin N, Haslwanter D, Weber M, Gesslbauer B, Sixt M, Strobl H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Center of Pathophysiology, Infectiology, and
Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Langerhans cells (LCs) are a unique subset of dendritic cells (DCs) that express 
epithelial adhesion molecules, allowing them to form contacts with epithelial
cells and reside in epidermal/epithelial tissues. The dynamic regulation of
epithelial adhesion plays a decisive role in the life cycle of LCs. It controls
whether LCs remain immature and sessile within the epidermis or mature and egress
to initiate immune responses. So far, the molecular machinery regulating
epithelial adhesion molecules during LC maturation remains elusive. Here, we
generated pure populations of immature human LCs in vitro to systematically probe
for gene-expression changes during LC maturation. LCs down-regulate a set of
epithelial genes including E-cadherin, while they upregulate the mesenchymal
marker N-cadherin known to facilitate cell migration. In addition, N-cadherin is 
constitutively expressed by monocyte-derived DCs known to exhibit characteristics
of both inflammatory-type and interstitial/dermal DCs. Moreover, the
transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2 (ZEB is zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox)
are upregulated in migratory LCs. ZEB1 and ZEB2 have been shown to induce
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invasive behavior in cancer cells 
undergoing metastasis. Our results provide the first hint that the molecular EMT 
machinery might facilitate LC mobilization. Moreover, our study suggests that
N-cadherin plays a role during DC migration.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24165969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Feb;67:91-102. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.10.811. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

Aldose reductase regulates miR-200a-3p/141-3p to coordinate Keap1-Nrf2, Tgfß1/2, 
and Zeb1/2 signaling in renal mesangial cells and the renal cortex of diabetic
mice.

Wei J(1), Zhang Y(1), Luo Y(2), Wang Z(1), Bi S(1), Song D(1), Dai Y(1), Wang
T(1), Qiu L(3), Wen L(4), Yuan L(5), Yang JY(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiang'an, Xiamen, 361102,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for 
Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiang'an, Xiamen,
361102, China; School of Nursing, The Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, 400038, China. Electronic address: luoyuhlgl@gmail.com. (3)School of
Life Sciences and Fujian Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine and
Biotechnology, Longyan University, Longyan, 364000, China. (4)School of Life
Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230027, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiang'an, Xiamen, 361102,
China. Electronic address: yuanli@xmu.edu.cn. (6)State Key Laboratory of Cellular
Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiang'an, Xiamen, 361102, China; Fujian Provincial Transgenic 
Core, Laboratory Animal Center, Xiamen University, Xiang'an, Xiamen, 361102,
China. Electronic address: jyqy2008@gmail.com.

Aberrant regulation in oxidative stress, fibrogenesis, and the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in renal cells under hyperglycemic
conditions contributes significantly to the onset and progression of diabetic
nephropathy. The mechanisms underlying these hyperglycemia-induced
dysregulations, however, have not been clearly elucidated. Herein, we report that
aldose reductase is capable of regulating the expression of miR-200a-3p/141-3p
negatively in renal mesangial cells. MiR-200a-3p/141-3p, in turn, act to target
Keap1, Tgfß2, fibronectin, and Zeb2 directly and regulate Tgfß1 and Nrf2
indirectly under high-glucose conditions, resulting in profound dysregulations in
Keap1-Nrf2, Tgfß1/2, and Zeb1/2 signaling. In vivo in streptozotocin-induced
diabetic mice, we found that aldose reductase deficiency caused significant
elevations in miR-200a-3p/141-3p in the renal cortex, which were accompanied by a
significant downregulation of Keap1, Tgfß1/2, and fibronectin but significant
upregulation of Nrf2. Moreover, in vivo administration of inhibitors of
miR-200a-3p in diabetic animals significantly exacerbated cortical and glomerular
fibrogenesis and increased urinary albumin excretion, tightly linking
dysregulated miR-200a-3p with the development of diabetic nephropathy.
Collectively, our results reveal a novel mechanism whereby hyperglycemia induces 
aldose reductase to regulate renal expression of miR-200a-3p/141-3p to
coordinately control hyperglycemia-induced renal oxidative stress, fibrogenesis, 
and the EMT. Our novel findings also suggest that inhibition of aldose reductase 
and in vivo renal cortical restoration of miR-200a-3p/141-3p or their combination
are very promising avenues for the development of therapeutic strategies or drugs
against diabetic nephropathy.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24161443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Toxicology. 2013 Dec 15;314(2-3):247-53. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.10.004. Epub
2013 Oct 21.

Time and dose-dependent effects of phenobarbital on the rat liver miRNAome.

Koufaris C(1), Wright J, Osborne M, Currie RA, Gooderham NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, SW72AZ, UK; Department of
Cytogenetics and Genomics, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia,
Cyprus.

In a previous study we had shown that treatment of male Fischer rats with
exogenous chemicals for three months resulted in prominent, mode-of-action
dependent effects on liver microRNA (miRNA) (Koufaris et al., 2012). Here we
investigated how the effects of chemicals on liver miRNA in male Fischer rats
relate to the length and dose of exposure to phenobarbital (PB), a drug with
multiple established hepatic effects. Importantly, although acute PB treatment
(1-7 days) had significant effects on liver mRNA and the expected effects on the 
liver phenotype (transient hyperplasia, hepatomegaly, cytochrome P450 induction),
limited effects on liver miRNA were observed. However, at 14 days of PB treatment
clear dose-dependent effects on miRNA were observed. The main effect of PB
treatment from days 1 to 90 on liver miRNA was found to be the persistent,
progressive, and highly correlated induction of the miR-200a/200b/429 and
miR-96/182 clusters, occurring after the termination of the xenobiotic-induced
transient hyperplasia. Moreover, in agreement with their reported functions in
the literature we found associations between perturbations of miR-29b and
miR-200a/200b by PB with global DNA methylation and zeb1/zeb2 proteins
respectively. Our data suggest that miRNA are unlikely to play an important role 
in the acute responses of the adult rodent liver to PB treatment. However, the
miRNA responses to longer PB exposures suggest a potential role for maintaining
liver homeostasis in response to sub-chronic and chronic xenobiotic-induced
perturbations. Similar studies for more chemicals are needed to clarify whether
the temporal and dose pattern of miRNA-toxicant interaction identified here for
PB are widely applicable to other xenobiotics.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24157574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 5;110(45):18144-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1318192110. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

MicroRNA-based regulation of epithelial-hybrid-mesenchymal fate determination.

Lu M(1), Jolly MK, Levine H, Onuchic JN, Ben-Jacob E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics and Departments of Bioengineering,
Physics and Astronomy, Chemistry, and Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice
University, Houston, TX 77005-1827.

Forward and backward transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes
play crucial roles in embryonic development and tissue repair. Aberrantly
regulated transitions are also a hallmark of cancer metastasis. The genetic
network that regulates these transitions appears to allow for the existence of a 
hybrid phenotype (epithelial/mesenchymal). Hybrid cells are endowed with mixed
epithelial and mesenchymal characteristics, enabling specialized capabilities
such as collective cell migration. Cell-fate determination between the three
phenotypes is in fact regulated by a circuit composed of two highly
interconnected chimeric modules--the miR-34/SNAIL and the miR-200/ZEB
mutual-inhibition feedback circuits. Here, we used detailed modeling of
microRNA-based regulation to study this core unit. More specifically, we
investigated the functions of the two isolated modules and subsequently of the
combined unit when the two modules are integrated into the full regulatory
circuit. We found that miR-200/ZEB forms a tristable circuit that acts as a
ternary switch, driven by miR-34/SNAIL, that is a monostable module that acts as 
a noise-buffering integrator of internal and external signals. We propose to
associate the three stable states--(1,0), (high miR-200)/(low ZEB); (0,1), (low
miR-200)/(high ZEB); and (1/2,1/2), (medium miR-200)/(medium ZEB)--with the
epithelial, mesenchymal, and hybrid phenotypes, respectively. Our (1/2,1/2) state
hypothesis is consistent with recent experimental studies (e.g., ZEB expression
measurements in collectively migrating cells) and explains the lack of observed
mesenchymal-to-hybrid transitions in metastatic cells and in induced pluripotent 
stem cells. Testable predictions of dynamic gene expression during complete and
partial transitions are presented.

PMCID: PMC3831488
PMID: 24154725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2650. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3650.

Rb1 family mutation is sufficient for sarcoma initiation.

Liu Y(1), Sánchez-Tilló E, Lu X, Clem B, Telang S, Jenson AB, Cuatrecasas M,
Chesney J, Postigo A, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular Targets Program, James Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, 529 South Jackson Street, Louisville, Kentucky
40202, USA [2] Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, 301 East Muhammad Ali Boulevard, Louisville,
Kentucky 40202, USA [3] Birth Defects Center, University of Louisville Health
Sciences Center, 301 East Muhammad Ali Boulevard, Louisville, Kentucky 40202,
USA.

It is thought that genomic instability precipitated by Rb1 pathway loss rapidly
triggers additional cancer gene mutations, accounting for rapid tumour onset
following Rb1 mutation. However, recent whole-genome sequencing of
retinoblastomas demonstrated little genomic instability, but instead suggested
rapid epigenetic activation of cancer genes. These results raise the possibility 
that loss of the Rb1 pathway, which is a hallmark of cancers, might be sufficient
for cancer initiation. Yet, mutation of the Rb1 family or inactivation of the Rb1
pathway in primary cells has proven insufficient for tumour initiation. Here we
demonstrate that traditional nude mouse assays impose an artificial anoikis and
proliferation barrier that prevents Rb1 family mutant fibroblasts from initiating
tumours. By circumventing this barrier, we show that primary fibroblasts with
only an Rb1 family mutation efficiently form sarcomas in nude mice, and a
Ras-ZEB1-Akt pathway then causes transition of these tumours to an invasive
phenotype.

PMID: 24150016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):73-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2801. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Inhibition of ZNF746 suppresses invasion and epithelial to mesenchymal transition
in H460 non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Kim B(1), Sohn EJ, Jung JH, Shin EA, You OH, Im J, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul
130-701, Republic of Korea.

Although ZNF746, also known as Parkin-interacting substrate (PARIS), has been
reported to suppress peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a 
(PGC-1a) and its target gene NRF-1 leading to the neurodegeneration in
Parkinson's disease, its function in tumorigenesis has yet to be investigated.
Thus, in the present study, the role of ZNF746 in the invasion and epithelial to 
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in H460 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells was
investigated. Invasion assay showed that inhibition of ZNF746 using siRNA
transfection inhibited the invasion of H460 NSCLC cells using Boyden chamber.
Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis revealed that the silencing of ZNF746 attenuated
the expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)1, MMP2 and MMP9, but not MMP7,
in H460 NSCLC cells. Immunoblotting assay revealed that the expression of
E-cadherin and ß-catenin of epithelial phenotype was upregulated, while Slug was 
downregulated in ZNF746 siRNA-transfected H460 NSCLC cells. Accordingly, the mRNA
expression of E-cadherin was upregulated while vimentin or Slug, Twist, ZEB as
EMT key transcriptional factors were suppressed in ZNF746 siRNA-transfected H460 
NSCLC cells. Also, mRNA expression of transcriptional marker Nanog and
Octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4), known to enhance malignancy and
metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma, was suppressed in ZNF746 siRNA-transfected
H460 NSCLC cells. Notably, the endogenous expression of ZNF746 was induced in
parallel with Twist at the protein level during hypoxia. Overall, our findings
suggest that inhibition of ZNF746 suppresses the invasion and EMT molecules in
H460 NSCLC cells and ZNF746 may be an important target molecule in lung
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 24145959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2013 Oct 13;Suppl 59:OL1861-8.

Overexpression of microRna-200c in CD44+CD133+ CSCS inhibits the cellular
migratory and invasion as well as tumorigenicity in mice.

Dou J(1), He XF, Cao WH, Zhao FS, Wang XY, Liu YR, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Southeast University Department of Pathogenic Biology and
Immunology Nanjing China njdoujun&commat;yahoo.com.cn.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are believed to be responsible for drug resistance,
metastasis of tumors. To investigate the biological characteristics of
CD44+CD133+CSCs with over- expressing microRNA-200c (miR-200c), and to provide
evidences for miR-200c as a tumor suppressor to treat melanoma. CD44+CD133+CSCs
were isolated from the mouse melanoma B16F10 cell line by using immune magnetic
activated cell sorting. The lentivirus miR-200c was transduced into the cells,
and the effect of miR-200c overexpression on the biological characteristics of
B16F10 CD44+ CD133+CSCs was analyzed by a series assays. The stable
overexpression of miR-200c in B16F10 CD44+CD133+CSCs obviously resulted in
downregulation of zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 expression, reduction of
the cell proliferation, colony forming, cell migratory and invasion ability in
vitro as well as tumorigenicity in vivo compared with those of the B16F10 cells
and B16F10 non-CD44+ CD133+CSCs. These findings suggest that the miR-200c
overexpression as a novel strategy to target therapy of melanoma CSCs.

PMID: 24120113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 15;8(10):e73306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073306.
eCollection 2013.

MUC1 regulates expression of multiple microRNAs involved in pancreatic tumor
progression, including the miR-200c/141 cluster.

Mohr AM(1), Bailey JM, Lewallen ME, Liu X, Radhakrishnan P, Yu F, Tapprich W,
Hollingsworth MA.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

MUC1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein that modulates transcription via its
cytoplasmic domain. We evaluated the capacity of MUC1 to regulate the global
transcription of microRNAs in pancreatic cancer cells expressing MUC1. Results
indicated that MUC1 regulated expression of at least 103 microRNAs. We evaluated 
further regulation of the microRNA transcript cluster miR-200c/141, which was
among the most highly regulated microRNAs. We found that MUC1 directly interacted
with ZEB1, a known transcriptional repressor of the miR-200c/141 cluster, at the 
promoter of miR-200c/141, and further reduced transcript production. These data
indicate that signaling through MUC1 influences cancer progression by regulating 
transcription of microRNAs that are associated with the process of metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3797065
PMID: 24143167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Cytokine. 2014 Jan;65(1):17-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.09.020. Epub 2013 Oct
18.

Regulation of interferon lambda-1 (IFNL1/IFN-<U+03BB>1/IL-29) expression in human colon 
epithelial cells.

Swider A(1), Siegel R, Eskdale J, Gallagher G.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Immunology Laboratory, HUMIGEN LLC, 2439 Kuser Road, Hamilton, NJ
08690, United States(1).

The efficient regulation of intestinal immune responses is critical to colon
health. Viruses, for example noraviruses, are key pathogens of the intestine. The
lambda interferons (comprising three ligands: IFNL1, L2 and L3 - the so-called
"Type III" interferons) constitute the most recently discovered IFN family and
are known to be important in intestinal anti-viral defense. A fourth family
member, IFNL4, was recently described. Expression of the IFN-lambda receptor is
restricted to epithelial and immune cells; together, these ligands and their
receptor represent an important anti-viral and immunoregulatory component of the 
immune/epithelial inteface. We investigated control of IFNL1 expression in human 
colon epithelial cells. We used the TLR3 agonist poly I:C to drive expression of 
IFNL1 in SW480 cells, and small interfering RNA (siRNA) to knockdown target
transcription factors. We identified ZEB1 and BLIMP-1 as transcription factors
that strongly inhibited IFNL1 expression in SW480 cells. Interestingly, while
BLIMP-1 inhibited both type-III and type-I interferons (IFN-ß), the inhibitory
action of ZEB1 was specific for IFNL1. We also defined the NF-<U+03BA>B family member,
p65 as a key activator of IFNL1 and NF-<U+03BA>B p50 as a key inhibitor. Finally, we
demonstrated that siRNA targeting of ZEB1 or NF-<U+03BA>B p50 resulted in a significant 
elevation of secreted IFN-<U+03BB>1 protein and expression of the anti-viral gene OAS1, 
while knockdown of p65 inhibited these events. Our data provide insight to the
regulation of IFNL1 expression in the human colon and suggest novel therapeutic
approaches to elevate IFN<U+03BB>-1 protein where required.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Ann Surg. 2014 Feb;259(2):346-54. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000000223.

Expression profile of microRNA-200 family in hepatocellular carcinoma with bile
duct tumor thrombus.

Yeh TS(1), Wang F, Chen TC, Yeh CN, Yu MC, Jan YY, Chen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Surgery; and Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang
Gung University, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the role of the miR-200 family in 
the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma with bile duct tumor thrombus
(HCC-BDTT).
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma with bile duct tumor thrombus is a
challenging condition because of its rarity and dismal prognosis.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered a critical step in the
progression and metastasis of HCC and is regulated by the microRNA-200 (miR-200) 
family.
METHODS: Thirty patients with HCC-BDTT were enrolled and 1240 patients with
conventional HCC (cHCC) served as clinicopathologic controls. Sixty age- and
sex-matched cHCC patients were selected to compare the miR-200 family expression 
profile and immunohistochemical characteristics. Gain- and loss-of-function
studies of the miR-200 family were conducted using the hepatoma cell lines.
RESULTS: Although the mean size of HCC-BDTT was smaller than that of cHCC, the
former had a higher incidence of vascular invasion and a poorer long-term
survival. The expressions of miR-200c and miR-141 were downregulated in HCC-BDTT 
(4.5- and 4.8-fold decrease, respectively). Downregulation of both miR-200c and
miR-141 independently predicted disease-free survival. The HCC-BDTT, but not
cHCC, exhibited overexpression of ZEB1, Twist, transforming growth factor-ß
receptor type II, and vimentin, and aberrant E-cadherin expression, indicating
EMT. The HCC-BDTT demonstrated increased expression in IL-6 and stemness factor
Bmi1, but reduced level of metastasis-suppressive protein, insulin-like growth
factor-binding protein 4. The invasive ability of the highly aggressive Mahlavu
cell was attenuated by pre-miR-200c+141, whereas the invasive ability of the less
aggressive Huh7 cell was enhanced by anti-miR-200c+141.
CONCLUSIONS: Simultaneous silencing of miR-200c and miR-141 was likely to be
responsible for the development of HCC-BDTT via ZEB1-directed EMT activation and 
Sec23a-mediated secretome.

PMID: 24135722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 Oct 14;20(6):809-23. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0357. Print
2013 Dec.

A miRNA signature associated with human metastatic medullary thyroid carcinoma.

Santarpia L(1), Calin GA, Adam L, Ye L, Fusco A, Giunti S, Thaller C, Paladini L,
Zhang X, Jimenez C, Trimarchi F, El-Naggar AK, Gagel RF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders Experimental
Therapeutics Urology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA Department of Oncology, The University of Naples, Naples,
Italy Department of Pathology, Centro Oncologico Fiorentino, Sesto Fiorentino,
Florence, Italy Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA Department of Oncology,
Istituto Toscano Tumori, Hospital of Prato, Prato, Italy Department of
Gynecologic Oncology, Center for RNA Interference and Non-coding RNAs, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA Department of 
Endocrinology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy Department of Pathology, The
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA Department
of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent a class of small, non-coding RNAs that control gene 
expression by targeting mRNA and triggering either translational repression or
RNA degradation. The objective of our study was to evaluate the involvement of
miRNAs in human medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and to identify the markers of 
metastatic cells and aggressive tumour behaviour. Using matched primary and
metastatic tumour samples, we identified a subset of miRNAs aberrantly regulated 
in metastatic MTC. Deregulated miRNAs were confirmed by quantitative real-time
PCR and validated by in situ hybridisation on a large independent set of primary 
and metastatic MTC samples. Our results uncovered ten miRNAs that were
significantly expressed and deregulated in metastatic tumours: miR-10a,
miR-200b/-200c, miR-7 and miR-29c were down-regulated and miR-130a, miR-138,
miR-193a-3p, miR-373 and miR-498 were up-regulated. Bioinformatic approaches
revealed potential miRNA targets and signals involved in metastatic MTC pathways.
Migration, proliferation and invasion assays were performed in cell lines treated
with miR-200 antagomirs to ascertain a direct role for this miRNA in MTC
tumourigenesis. We show that the members of miR-200 family regulate the
expression of E-cadherin by directly targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2 mRNA and through the
enhanced expression of tumour growth factor ß (TGFß)-2 and TGFß-1. Overall, the
treated cells shifted to a mesenchymal phenotype, thereby acquiring an aggressive
phenotype with increased motility and invasion. Our data identify a robust miRNA 
signature associated with metastatic MTC and distinct biological processes, e.g.,
TGFß signalling pathway, providing new potential insights into the mechanisms of 
MTC metastasis.

PMID: 24127332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Endocr Pathol. 2013 Dec;24(4):206-12. doi: 10.1007/s12022-013-9272-9.

The role of epithelial mesenchymal transition markers in thyroid carcinoma
progression.

Montemayor-Garcia C(1), Hardin H, Guo Z, Larrain C, Buehler D, Asioli S, Chen H, 
Lloyd RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, K4/436 Clinical Science Center, Box 8550,
600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI, 53792, USA.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in thyroid cancer progression may
provide targets for more effective treatment of aggressive thyroid cancers.
Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a major pathologic mechanism in tumor 
progression and is linked to the acquisition of stem-like properties of cancer
cells. We examined expression of ZEB1 which activates EMT by binding to the E-box
elements in the E-cadherin promoter, and expression of E-cadherin in normal and
neoplastic thyroid tissues in a tissue microarray which included 127 neoplasms
and 10 normal thyroid specimens. Thyroid follicular adenomas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>32), follicular
thyroid carcinomas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>28), and papillary thyroid carcinomas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>57) all
expressed E-cadherin and were mostly negative for ZEB1 while most anaplastic
thyroid carcinomas (ATC, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10) were negative for E-cadherin, but positive for
ZEB1. A validation set of 10 whole sections of ATCs showed 90 % of cases positive
for ZEB1 and all cases were negative for E-cadherin. Analysis of three cell lines
(normal thyroid, NTHY-OR13-1; PTC, TPC-1, and ATC, THJ-21T) showed that the ATC
cell line expressed the highest levels of ZEB1 while the normal thyroid cell line
expressed the highest levels of E-Cadherin. Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed
that Smad7 mRNA was significantly higher in ATC than in any other group
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). These results indicate that ATCs show evidence of EMT including
decreased expression of E-cadherin and increased expression of ZEB1 compared to
well-differentiated thyroid carcinomas and that increased expression of Smad7 may
be associated with thyroid tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3875396
PMID: 24126800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e76773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076773. eCollection
2013.

Transcription factors OVOL1 and OVOL2 induce the mesenchymal to epithelial
transition in human cancer.

Roca H(1), Hernandez J, Weidner S, McEachin RC, Fuller D, Sud S, Schumann T,
Wilkinson JE, Zaslavsky A, Li H, Maher CA, Daignault-Newton S, Healy PN, Pienta
KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America.

Cell plasticity regulated by the balance between the mesenchymal to epithelial
transition (MET) and the opposite program, EMT, is critical in the metastatic
cascade. Several transcription factors (TFs) are known to regulate EMT, though
the mechanisms of MET remain unclear. We demonstrate a novel function of two TFs,
OVOL1 and OVOL2, as critical inducers of MET in human cancers. Our findings
indicate that the OVOL-TFs control MET through a regulatory feedback loop with
EMT-inducing TF ZEB1, and the regulation of mRNA splicing by inducing Epithelial 
Splicing Regulatory Protein 1 (ESRP1). Using mouse prostate tumor models we show 
that expression of OVOL-TFs in mesenchymal prostate cancer cells attenuates their
metastatic potential. The role of OVOL-TFs as inducers of MET is further
supported by expression analyses in 917 cancer cell lines, suggesting their role 
as crucial regulators of epithelial-mesenchymal cell plasticity in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3790720
PMID: 24124593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Hepatology. 2014 Mar;59(3):1130-43. doi: 10.1002/hep.26889. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Small proline rich protein 2a in benign and malignant liver disease.

Mizuguchi Y(1), Isse K, Specht S, Lunz JG 3rd, Corbitt N, Takizawa T, Demetris
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, PA; Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

STAT3-driven expression of small proline rich protein 2a (SPRR2a), which acts as 
an src homology 3 (SH3) domain ligand, induces biliary epithelial cell (BEC)
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which, in turn, promotes wound healing. 
SPRR2a also quenches free radicals and protects against oxidative stress and DNA 
damage in nonneoplastic BEC. Sprr2a-induced EMT also increases local invasiveness
of cholangiocarcinomas (CC), but prevents metastases. Understanding SPRR2a
regulation of EMT has potential for therapeutic targeting in both benign and
malignant liver disease. Molecular mechanisms responsible for SPRR2a-induced EMT 
were characterized, in vitro, and then evidence for utilization of these pathways
was sought in human intrahepatic CC, in vivo, using multiplex labeling and
software-assisted morphometric analysis. SPRR2a complexes with ZEB1 and CtBP on
the microRNA (miR)-200c/141 promoter resulting in synergic suppression of
miR-200c/141 transcription, which is required for maintenance of the BEC
epithelial phenotype. SPRR2a induction promotes dephosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of the SH3-domain containing protein GRB2 and an SH3-domain ligand 
in ZEB1 is required for SPRR2a-induced synergic suppression of miR-200c/141.
Multiplex protein labeling of CC and morphometric analyses showed: 1)
up-regulation of ZEB-1, and 2) down-regulation of CK19 in intrahepatic CC
compared to nonneoplastic BEC, consistent with previous CC proteomic studies
showing EMT during cholangiocarcinogenesis.CONCLUSION: SPRR2a modulates ZEB-1
signaling by way of miR-200c/141-associated EMT through SH3-domain networks and
contributes to benign and malignant BEC wound-healing responses.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24123265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Pathol. 2014 Feb;232(3):319-29. doi: 10.1002/path.4289.

A core microRNA signature associated with inducers of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Díaz-Martín J(1), Díaz-López A, Moreno-Bueno G, Castilla MÁ, Rosa-Rosa JM, Cano
A, Palacios J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, CSIC-Universidad
de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain.

Although it is becoming clear that certain miRNAs fulfil a fundamental role in
the regulation of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a comprehensive
study of the miRNAs associated with this process has yet to be performed. Here,
we profiled the signature of miRNA expression in an in vitro model of EMT,
ectopically expressing in MDCK cells one of seven EMT transcription factors
(SNAI1, SNAI2, ZEB1, ZEB2, TWIST1, TWIST2 or E47) or the EMT inducer LOXL2. In
this way, we identified a core subset of deregulated miRNAs that were further
validated in vivo, studying endometrial carcinosarcoma (ECS), a tumour entity
that represents an extreme example of phenotypic plasticity. Moreover, epigenetic
silencing through DNA methylation of miRNA genes of the miR-200 family and
miR-205 that are down-regulated during EMT was evident in both the in vitro (MDCK
transfectants) and in vivo (ECS) models of EMT. The strong correlation between
expression and DNA methylation suggests a major role for this epigenetic mark in 
the regulation of the miR-141-200c locus.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24122292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 1;73(23):7111-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1755. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Neuropilin-2 Is upregulated in lung cancer cells during TGF-ß1-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Nasarre P(1), Gemmill RM, Potiron VA, Roche J, Lu X, Barón AE, Korch C,
Garrett-Mayer E, Lagana A, Howe PH, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Public
Health Sciences, Department of Biochemistry, The Hollings Cancer Center and
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina; Department of
Biostatistics and informatics; Division of Medical Oncology, University of
Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado; and Department of
Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 15;74(2):637.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and its reversal,
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), are fundamental processes involved in
tumor cell invasion and metastasis. SEMA3F is a secreted semaphorin and tumor
suppressor downregulated by TGF-ß1 and ZEB1-induced EMT. Here, we report that
neuropilin (NRP)-2, the high-affinity receptor for SEMA3F and a coreceptor for
certain growth factors, is upregulated during TGF-ß1-driven EMT in lung cancer
cells. Mechanistically, NRP2 upregulation was TßRI dependent and SMAD
independent, occurring mainly at a posttranscriptional level involving increased 
association of mRNA with polyribosomes. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) and AKT inhibition blocked NRP2 upregulation, whereas RNA
interference-mediated attenuation of ZEB1 reduced steady-state NRP2 levels. In
addition, NRP2 attenuation inhibited TGF-ß1-driven morphologic transformation,
migration/invasion, ERK activation, growth suppression, and changes in gene
expression. In a mouse xenograft model of lung cancer, NRP2 attenuation also
inhibited locally invasive features of the tumor and reversed TGF-ß1-mediated
growth inhibition. In support of these results, human lung cancer specimens with 
the highest NRP2 expression were predominantly E-cadherin negative. Furthermore, 
the presence of NRP2 staining strengthened the association of E-cadherin loss
with high-grade tumors. Together, our results demonstrate that NRP2 contributes
significantly to TGF-ß1-induced EMT in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3926507
PMID: 24121493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;45(12):2801-7. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.09.018. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Resolvin D1 inhibits TGF-ß1-induced epithelial mesenchymal transition of A549
lung cancer cells via lipoxin A4 receptor/formyl peptide receptor 2 and GPR32.

Lee HJ(1), Park MK, Lee EJ, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk University, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea.

Epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) is a key event for tumor cells to
initiate metastasis which lead to switching of E-cadherin to N-cadherin.
Resolvins are known to promote the resolution of inflammation and phagocytosis of
macrophages. However, the role of resolvins in EMT of cancer is not known.
Therefore, we examined the effects of resolvins on transforming growth factor,
beta 1 (TGF-ß1)-induced EMT. Expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin in A549 lung
cancer cells was evaluated by Western blot and confocal microscopy. Involvement
of lipoxin A4 receptor/formyl peptide receptor 2 (ALX/FPR2) was examined by gene 
silencing. TGF-ß1 induced expression of N-cadherin in A549 lung cancer cells, and
resolvin D1 and D2 inhibited the expression of N-cadherin at low concentrations
(1-100 nM). Resolvin D1 and D2 also suppressed the expression of zinc finger
E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1). The effects of resolvin D1 and D2 were confirmed
in other lung cancer cell lines such as H838, H1299, and H1703. Resolvin D1 and
D2 did not affect the proliferation of A549 lung cancer cells. Resolvin D1 and D2
also suppressed the TGF-ß1-induced morphological change. Resolvin D1 and D2 also 
inhibited the TGF-ß1-induced migration and invasion of A549 cells. Resolvin D1 is
known to act via ALX/FPR2 and GPR32. Thus, we examined the involvement of
ALX/FPR2 and GPR32 in the suppressive effects of resolvin D1 on TGF-ß1-induced
EMT of A549 cells. Gene silencing of ALX/FPR2 and GPR32 blocked the action of
resolvin D1. Overexpression of ALX/FPR2 or GPR32 increased the effects of
resolvin D1. These results suggest that resolvin D1 inhibited TGF-ß1-induced EMT 
via ALX/FPR2 and GPR32 by reducing the expression of ZEB1.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2013 Dec;131(12):1583-90. doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.5036.

Classification of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy as a corneal ectatic
disorder following confirmation of associated significant corneal steepening.

Aldave AJ(1), Ann LB(1), Frausto RF(1), Nguyen CK(1), Yu F(1), Raber IM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California, Los Angeles. (2)Wills Eye Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

IMPORTANCE: The identification of steep corneal curvatures in a significant
percentage of patients with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD)
confirms this previously reported association and suggests a role for the ZEB1
protein in keratocyte function.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether PPCD is characterized by significant corneal
steepening.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Cross-sectional study at university-based and 
private ophthalmology practices of 38 individuals (27 affected and 11 unaffected)
from 23 families with PPCD.
EXPOSURE: Slitlamp examination and corneal topographic imaging were performed for
individuals with PPCD and unaffected family members. Saliva or blood samples were
obtained from each individual for DNA isolation and ZEB1 sequencing. Corneal ZEB1
expression was measured using immunohistochemistry.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Percentage of individuals affected with PPCD and
controls with an average keratometric value greater than 48.0 diopters (D) in
each eye; the mean keratometric value averaged for both eyes of individuals with 
PPCD and controls; and the correlation of ZEB1 mutation with keratometric value.
RESULTS: ZEB1 coding region mutations were identified in 7 of the 27 affected
individuals. Ten of the 38 individuals (26.3%) had average keratometric values
greater than 48.0 D OU: 10 of 27 individuals with PPCD (37.0%; 6 of 7 individuals
with ZEB1 mutations [85.7%] and 4 of 20 individuals without ZEB1 mutations
[20.0%]) and 0 of 11 unaffected individuals (P = .04 for unaffected vs affected
individuals; P = .004 for individuals with PPCD with vs without ZEB1 mutation).
The mean keratometric value of each eye of affected individuals (48.2 D) was
significantly greater than that of each eye of unaffected family members (44.1 D)
(P = .03). Affected individuals with ZEB1 mutations demonstrated a mean
keratometric value of 53.3 D, which was significantly greater than that of
affected individuals without ZEB1 mutations (46.5 D; P = .004). Fluorescence
immunohistochemistry demonstrated ZEB1 expression in keratocyte nuclei.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Abnormally steep corneal curvatures are identified in 
37% of all individuals with PPCD and 86% of affected individuals with PPCD
secondary to ZEB1 mutations. ZEB1 is present in keratocyte nuclei, suggesting a
role for ZEB1 in keratocyte function. Therefore, ZEB1 may play a role in both
corneal stromal and endothelial development and function, and PPCD should be
considered both an endothelial dystrophy and an ectatic disorder.

PMCID: PMC3888803
PMID: 24113819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 10;4:e848. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.339.

Loss of TAK1 increases cell traction force in a ROS-dependent manner to drive
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of cancer cells.

Lam CR(1), Tan C, Teo Z, Tay CY, Phua T, Wu YL, Cai PQ, Tan LP, Chen X, Zhu P,
Tan NS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, Singapore.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial step in tumor progression,
and the TGFß-SMAD signaling pathway as an inductor of EMT in many tumor types is 
well recognized. However, the role of non-canonical TGFß-TAK1 signaling in EMT
remains unclear. Herein, we show that TAK1 deficiency drives metastatic skin
squamous cell carcinoma earlier into EMT that is conditional on the elevated
cellular ROS level. The expression of TAK1 is consistently reduced in invasive
squamous cell carcinoma biopsies. Tumors derived from TAK1-deficient cells also
exhibited pronounced invasive morphology. TAK1-deficient cancer cells adopt a
more mesenchymal morphology characterized by higher number of focal adhesions,
increase surface expression of integrin a5ß1 and active Rac1. Notably, these
mutant cells exert an increased cell traction force, an early cellular response
during TGFß1-induced EMT. The mRNA level of ZEB1 and SNAIL, transcription factors
associated with mesenchymal phenotype is also upregulated in TAK1-deficient
cancer cells compared with control cancer cells. We further show that TAK1
modulates Rac1 and RhoA GTPases activities via a redox-dependent downregulation
of RhoA by Rac1, which involves the oxidative modification of low-molecular
weight protein tyrosine phosphatase. Importantly, the treatment of TAK1-deficient
cancer cells with Y27632, a selective inhibitor of Rho-associated protein kinase 
and antioxidant N-acetylcysteine augment and hinders EMT, respectively. Our
findings suggest that a dysregulated balance in the activation of TGFß-TAK1 and
TGFß-SMAD pathways is pivotal for TGFß1-induced EMT. Thus, TAK1 deficiency in
metastatic cancer cells increases integrin:Rac-induced ROS, which negatively
regulated Rho by LMW-PTP to accelerate EMT.

PMCID: PMC3824649
PMID: 24113182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 3;4:e831. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.347.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers expressed in circulating tumor cells in
hepatocellular carcinoma patients with different stages of disease.

Li YM(1), Xu SC, Li J, Han KQ, Pi HF, Zheng L, Zuo GH, Huang XB, Li HY, Zhao HZ, 
Yu ZP, Zhou Z, Liang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

The presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in peripheral blood is associated 
with metastasis and prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. The
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has a pivotal role in tumor invasion and 
dissemination. To identify more sensitive biomarkers for evaluating metastasis
and prognosis, we investigated the expression of EMT markers, including vimentin,
twist, ZEB1, ZEB2, snail, slug and E-cadherin in CTCs, primary HCC tumors and
adjacent non-tumoral liver tissues. After isolating viable CTCs from the
peripheral blood of HCC patients using asialoglycoprotein receptors (ASGPRs), the
CTCs were identified with immunofluorescence staining. CTCs were detected in the 
peripheral blood obtained from 46 of 60 (76.7%) HCC patients.
Triple-immunofluorescence staining showed that twist and vimentin expression
could be detected in CTCs obtained from 39 (84.8%) and 37 (80.4%) of the 46
patients, respectively. The expression of both twist and vimentin in CTCs was
significantly correlated with portal vein tumor thrombus. Coexpression of twist
and vimentin in CTCs could be detected in 32 (69.6%) of the 46 patients and was
highly correlated with portal vein tumor thrombus, TNM classification and tumor
size. Quantitative fluorescence western blot analysis revealed that the
expression levels of E-cadherin, vimentin and twist in HCC tumors were
significantly associated with the positivity of isolated CTCs (P=0.013, P=0.012, 
P=0.009, respectively). However, there was no significant difference in ZEB1,
ZEB2, snail and slug expression levels in CTCs, primary HCC tumors and adjacent
non-tumoral liver tissues across samples with regard to the clinicopathological
parameters. Our results demonstrate that the EMT has a role in promoting the
blood-borne dissemination of primary HCC cells, and the twist and vimentin
expression levels in CTCs could serve as promising biomarkers for evaluating
metastasis and prognosis in HCC patients.

PMCID: PMC3824657
PMID: 24091674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cancer Res. 2013 Nov 15;73(22):6621-31. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0560. Epub 
2013 Sep 27.

Genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of mTORC1 promotes EMT by a
TGF-ß-independent mechanism.

Mikaelian I(1), Malek M, Gadet R, Viallet J, Garcia A, Girard-Gagnepain A,
Hesling C, Gillet G, Gonzalo P, Rimokh R, Billaud M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Université Lyon 1, ISPB; CNRS UMR5286, INSERM U1052,
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard; CIRI INSERM
U1111, CNRS UMR5308, ENS Lyon, Lyon; INSERM, U823, Université Joseph
Fourier-Grenoble 1, Institut Albert Bonniot; In Ovo, Grenoble, France; and
Inositide Laboratory-Signaling Program, Babraham Institute-Babraham Research
Campus, Babraham, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a transdifferentiation process that
converts epithelial cells into highly motile mesenchymal cells. This physiologic 
process occurs largely during embryonic development but is aberrantly reactivated
in different pathologic situations, including fibrosis and cancer. We conducted a
siRNA screening targeted to the human kinome with the aim of discovering new EMT 
effectors. With this approach, we have identified mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1), a
nutrient sensor that controls protein and lipid synthesis, as a key regulator of 
epithelial integrity. Using a combination of RNAi and pharmacologic approaches,
we report here that inhibition of either mTOR or RPTOR triggers EMT in mammary
epithelial cells. This EMT was characterized by the induction of the mesenchymal 
markers such as fibronectin, vimentin, and PAI-1, together with the repression of
epithelial markers such as E-cadherin and ZO-3. In addition, mTORC1 blockade
enhanced in vivo migratory properties of mammary cells and induced EMT
independent of the TGF-ß pathway. Finally, among the transcription factors known 
to activate EMT, both ZEB1 and ZEB2 were upregulated following mTOR repression.
Their increased expression correlated with a marked reduction in miR-200b and
miR-200c mRNA levels, two microRNAs known to downregulate ZEB1 and ZEB2
expression. Taken together, our findings unravel a novel function for mTORC1 in
maintaining the epithelial phenotype and further indicate that this effect is
mediated through the opposite regulation of ZEB1/ZEB2 and miR-200b and miR-200c. 
Furthermore, these results suggest a plausible etiologic explanation for the
progressive pulmonary fibrosis, a frequent adverse condition associated with the 
therapeutic use of mTOR inhibitors.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 24078802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Cell. 2013 Oct 14;24(4):466-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.08.018. Epub 2013 
Sep 26.

A switch in the expression of embryonic EMT-inducers drives the development of
malignant melanoma.

Caramel J(1), Papadogeorgakis E, Hill L, Browne GJ, Richard G, Wierinckx A,
Saldanha G, Osborne J, Hutchinson P, Tse G, Lachuer J, Puisieux A, Pringle JH,
Ansieau S, Tulchinsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR-S1052, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69008 Lyon,
France; CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69008 Lyon,
France; LabEX DEVweCAN, 69008 Lyon, France; University Lyon I, 69008 Lyon,
France; Université de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France; Centre Léon Bérard, 69008 Lyon,
France.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 15;5(1):1-2.
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2014 Mar;27(2):157-8.

Aberrant expression of embryonic epithelial-mesenchymal transition-inducing
transcription factors (EMT-TFs) in epithelial cells triggers EMT, neoplastic
transformation, stemness, and metastatic dissemination. We found that regulation 
and functions of EMT-TFs are different in malignant melanoma. SNAIL2 and ZEB2
transcription factors are expressed in normal melanocytes and behave as
tumor-suppressor proteins by activating an MITF-dependent melanocyte
differentiation program. In response to NRAS/BRAF activation, EMT-TF network
undergoes a profound reorganization in favor of TWIST1 and ZEB1. This reversible 
switch cooperates with BRAF in promoting dedifferentiation and neoplastic
transformation of melanocytes. We detected EMT-TF reprogramming in late-stage
melanoma in association with enhanced phospho-ERK levels. This switch results in 
E-cadherin loss, enhanced invasion, and constitutes an independent factor of poor
prognosis in melanoma patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24075834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 8;288(45):32742-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.478016. Epub 2013
Sep 26.

Regulation of the microRNA 200b (miRNA-200b) by transcriptional regulators PEA3
and ELK-1 protein affects expression of Pin1 protein to control anoikis.

Zhang X(1), Zhang B, Gao J, Wang X, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and.

MicroRNA (miRNA) 200s regulate E-cadherin by directly targeting ZEB1/ZEB2, which 
are transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin. Decreased expression of E-cadherin 
results in cancer cells losing interaction with the extracellular matrix and
detaching from the primary tumor. Normally, cells will undergo anoikis after
losing interaction with the extracellular matrix. Cancer cells must, therefore,
possess the ability to resist anoikis during the process of metastasis. Here we
show that miRNA-200b regulates anoikis by directly targeting the 3' UTR of Pin1
mRNA and regulating Pin1 expression at the translational level. We found that
down-regulation of miRNA-200b promotes cancer cells survival during metastasis,
and the homeless state of these cells resulted in decreased expression of
miRNA-200b in the MCF-7 cell line. We also found that expression of miRNA-200b is
down-regulated in human breast cancer during lymph node metastasis, which has a
significant negative correlation with Pin1 expression. Two members of the ETS
(E-26) family (PEA3 and ELK-1) regulate the expression of miRNA-200b. PEA3
promotes the expression of miRNA-200b, and ELK-1 is a transcriptional repressor
of miRNA-200b. In addition, miRNA-200b regulates the activity of PEA3 and ELK-1
via the Pin1-pERK pathway and forms self-regulated feedback loops. This study
characterizes the role of miRNA-200b in the regulation of anoikis and
demonstrates the regulation of its own expression in the process of metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3820908
PMID: 24072701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 15;12(14):2309-20. doi: 10.4161/cc.25405.

Activation of miR200 by c-Myb depends on ZEB1 expression and miR200 promoter
methylation.

Pieraccioli M(1), Imbastari F, Antonov A, Melino G, Raschellà G.

Author information: 
(1)ENEA Research Center Casaccia, Radiation Biology and Human Health Unit, Rome, 
Italy.

Tumor progression to metastasis is a complex, sequential process that requires
proliferation, resistance to apoptosis, motility and invasion to colonize at
distant sites. The acquisition of these features implies a phenotypic plasticity 
by tumor cells that must adapt to different conditions by modulating several
signaling pathways (1) during the journey to the final site of metastasis.
Several transcription factors and microRNA play a role in tumor progression, but 
less is known about the control of their expression during this process. Here, we
demonstrate by ectopic expression and gene silencing that the proto-oncogene
c-Myb activates the expression of the 5 members of miR200 family (miR200b,
miR200a, miR429, miR200c and miR141) that are involved in the control of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis in many types of cancers. 
Transcriptional activation of miR200 by c-Myb occurs through binding to myb
binding sites located in the promoter regions of miR200 genes on human
chromosomes 1 and 12. Furthermore, when c-Myb and the transcriptional repressor
ZEB1 are co-expressed, as at the onset EMT, the repression by ZEB1 prevails over 
the activation by c-Myb, and the expression of miR200 is inhibited. We also
demonstrate that during EMT induced by TGF-ß, the promoters of miR200 genes are
methylated, and their transcription is repressed regardless of the presence of
repressors such as ZEB1 and activators such as c-Myb. Finally, we find a
correlation between the expression of c-Myb and that of four out of 5 miR200 in a
data set of 207 breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3755081
PMID: 24067373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Lab Invest. 2013 Nov;93(11):1219-31. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.108. Epub 2013
Sep 16.

All-transretinoic acid ameliorates bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis by
downregulating the TGF-ß1/Smad3 signaling pathway in rats.

Song X(1), Liu W, Xie S, Wang M, Cao G, Mao C, Lv C.

Author information: 
(1)Medicine Research Center, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, China.

The transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)/Smad3 signaling pathway has a central 
role in pathogenesis of lung fibrosis. In the present study, we investigated if
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) could attenuate fibrosis in bleomycin
(BLM)-induced lung fibrosis in rats through regulating TGF-ß1/Smad3 signaling.
Beginning on day 14 after BLM administration, the ATRA I and II groups of rats
received daily oral administration of ATRA for 14 days. All rats were killed on
day 28. Lung tissue sections were prepared and subject to histological
assessment, and expression levels of proteins involved in the TGF-ß1 signaling
cascade and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were evaluated by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR), western blot procedure, and immunohistochemical or
immunofluorescence staining. BLM significantly increased the alveolar septum
infiltrates, inflammatory cell infiltrates, and collagen fibers. These
BLM-induced changes were significantly ameliorated by ATRA treatment. In
addition, BLM significantly increased levels of lung fibrosis markers a-SMA,
hydroxyproline (Hyp), collagen I, Snail, and Twist, whereas significantly
decreased E-cadherin expression. ATRA treatment largely reversed BLM-induced
changes in these lung fibrosis markers. ATRA also blocked BLM-induced activation 
of the TGF-ß1/Smad3 signaling pathway in lung tissues, including expression of
TGF-ß1, Smad3, p-Smad3, zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 and 2 (ZEB1 and
ZEB2), and the high-mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2). Our results suggest that
ATRA may have potential therapeutic value for lung fibrosis treatment.

PMID: 24042439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014 Nov;29(11):2136-44. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gft279. Epub
2013 Sep 15.

Expression of the transcriptional regulator snail1 in kidney transplants
displaying epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition features.

Xu-Dubois YC(1), Galichon P(2), Brocheriou I(3), Baugey E(2), Morichon R(4),
Jouanneau C(2), Ouali N(5), Rondeau E(6), Hertig A(6).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U702, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France Département de Santé Publique, APHP,
Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France. (2)INSERM U702, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France.
(3)Anatomo-Pathologie, APHP, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, Paris 6, France. (4)IFR65, Imagerie cellulaire, Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, Paris 6, France. (5)Urgences Néphrologiques et Transplantation
Rénale, APHP, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France. (6)INSERM U702, Hôpital Tenon, Paris,
France Anatomo-Pathologie, APHP, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France Urgences
Néphrologiques et Transplantation Rénale, APHP, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial response to injury is stereotypical and reminiscent of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions (EMTs), such as those observed during
embryogenesis and tumour metastasis. In the context of solid organ
transplantation, EMT-like features are often acquired by epithelial cells and are
predictive of graft fibrosis. Here, we studied the possible involvement of
several major transcriptional regulators, including snail1, phospho-Smad 2/3 and 
zeb1, in EMT induction in human renal grafts.
METHODS: We used immunohistochemistry to detect the presence of these EMT
transcriptional regulators along with that of two validated EMT markers
(intra-cytoplasmic translocation of ß-catenin, de novo expression of vimentin),
in 103 renal graft biopsy samples taken for routine surveillance or for a
clinical indication.
RESULTS: We observed the nuclear accumulation of snail1 and phospho-smad2/3 in
tubular cells displaying EMT. The level of snail1 was significantly correlated
with the scores of EMT markers (ß-catenin: <U+03C1> = 0.94, P < 0.0001; vimentin: <U+03C1> =
0.93, P < 0.0001) and with deteriorated graft function and proteinuria at the
time of biopsy. Furthermore, intense staining for both snail1 and vimentin in
tubular cells (=10% of tubules) was predictive of graft dysfunction 21 months
post-biopsy, independently of the other known risk factor for long-term graft
dysfunction. In contrast, in both normal and diseased graft, zeb1 expression was 
detected exclusively in the endothelial cells of glomeruli and peritubular
capillaries.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that snail1 is closely related to the fibrogenic,
EMT-like response of the tubular epithelium in human renal grafts and predictive 
of graft function loss.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24042020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e73940. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073940. eCollection 
2013.

DCLK1 regulates pluripotency and angiogenic factors via microRNA-dependent
mechanisms in pancreatic cancer.

Sureban SM(1), May R, Qu D, Weygant N, Chandrakesan P, Ali N, Lightfoot SA,
Pantazis P, Rao CV, Postier RG, Houchen CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America ; Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America ; The
Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United
States of America.

Stem cell pluripotency, angiogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
have been shown to be significantly upregulated in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and many other aggressive cancers. The dysregulation of
these processes is believed to play key roles in tumor initiation, progression,
and metastasis, and is contributory to PDAC being the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the US. The tumor suppressor miRNA miR-145 downregulates
critical pluripotency factors and oncogenes and results in repressed metastatic
potential in PDAC. Additionally, the miR-200 family regulates several angiogenic 
factors which have been linked to metastasis in many solid tumors. We have
previously demonstrated that downregulation of DCLK1 can upregulate critical
miRNAs in both in vitro and in vivo cancer models and results in downregulation
of c-MYC, KRAS, NOTCH1 and EMT-related transcription factors. A recent report has
also shown that Dclk1 can distinguish between normal and tumor stem cells in Apc 
(min/+) mice and that ablation of Dclk1(+) cells resulted in regression of
intestinal polyps without affecting homeostasis. Here we demonstrate that the
knockdown of DCLK1 using poly(lactide-co-glycolide)-encapsulated-DCLK1-siRNA
results in AsPC1 tumor growth arrest. Examination of xenograft tumors revealed,
(a) increased miR-145 which results in decreased pluripotency maintenance factors
OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, KLF4 as well as KRAS and RREB1; (b) increased let-7a which
results in decreased pluripotency factor LIN28B; and (c) increased miR-200 which 
results in decreased VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and EMT-related transcription factors ZEB1,
ZEB2, SNAIL and SLUG. Specificity of DCLK1 post-transcriptional regulation of the
downstream targets of miR-145, miR-200 and let-7a was accomplished utilizing a
luciferase-based reporter assay. We conclude that DCLK1 plays a significant
master regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis through the regulation of
multiple tumor suppressor miRNAs and their downstream pro-tumorigenic pathways.
This novel concept of targeting DCLK1 alone has several advantages over targeting
single pathway or miRNA-based therapies for PDAC.

PMCID: PMC3767662
PMID: 24040120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 31;33(31):4077-88. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.370. Epub 2013 Sep
16.

MiR-200 can repress breast cancer metastasis through ZEB1-independent but
moesin-dependent pathways.

Li X(1), Roslan S(1), Johnstone CN(2), Wright JA(3), Bracken CP(3), Anderson
M(1), Bert AG(1), Selth LA(4), Anderson RL(5), Goodall GJ(6), Gregory PA(3),
Khew-Goodall Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Immunology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (2)1] Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia [2] Sir Peter MacCallum
Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia [3] Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia [4] Department of Pharmacology, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (3)1] Division of Human Immunology, Centre for
Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [2] Discipline
of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(4)Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories, Discipline of Medicine,
University of Adelaide, Hanson Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(5)1] Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia [2] Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia [3] Department of Pathology, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (6)1] Division of Human 
Immunology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia [2] Discipline of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia [3] School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (7)1] Division of
Human Immunology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia [2] School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

The microRNA-200 (miR-200) family has a critical role in regulating
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer cell invasion through inhibition of 
the E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2. Recent studies have
indicated that the miR-200 family may exert their effects at distinct stages in
the metastatic process, with an overall effect of enhancing metastasis in a
syngeneic mouse breast cancer model. We find in a xenograft orthotopic model of
breast cancer metastasis that ectopic expression of members of the
miR-200b/200c/429, but not the miR-141/200a, functional groups limits tumour cell
invasion and metastasis. Despite modulation of the ZEB1-E-cadherin axis,
restoration of ZEB1 in miR-200b-expressing cells was not able to alter metastatic
potential suggesting that other targets contribute to this process. Instead, we
found that miR-200b repressed several actin-associated genes, with the knockdown 
of the ezrin-radixin-moesin family member moesin alone phenocopying the
repression of cell invasion by miR-200b. Moesin was verified to be directly
targeted by miR-200b, and restoration of moesin in miR-200b-expressing cells was 
sufficient to alleviate metastatic repression. In breast cancer cell lines and
patient samples, the expression of moesin significantly inversely correlated with
miR-200 expression, and high levels of moesin were associated with poor
relapse-free survival. These findings highlight the context-dependent effects of 
miR-200 in breast cancer metastasis and demonstrate the existence of a
moesin-dependent pathway, distinct from the ZEB1-E-cadherin axis, through which
miR-200 can regulate tumour cell plasticity and metastasis.

PMID: 24037528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):247-57. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.123. Epub 2013
Sep 6.

The EMT activator ZEB1 promotes tumor growth and determines differential response
to chemotherapy in mantle cell lymphoma.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), Fanlo L(2), Siles L(1), Montes-Moreno S(3), Moros A(4),
Chiva-Blanch G(5), Estruch R(5), Martinez A(6), Colomer D(4), Gyorffy B(7), Roué 
G(4), Postigo A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology
and Hematology, IDIBAPS, CIBERehd, Barcelona 08036, Spain. (2)1] Group of
Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology and
Hematology, IDIBAPS, CIBERehd, Barcelona 08036, Spain [2] Master Program in
Biomedical Research, University Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08002, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology and Group of Cancer Genomics, Hospital Marques de
Valdecilla, IFIMAV, Santander 39008, Spain. (4)Hematopathology Unit, Hospital
Clinic, IDIBAPS, Barcelona 08036, Spain. (5)1] Department of Internal Medicine,
Hospital Clinic, Barcelona 08036, Spain [2] CIBERobn, ISCIII, Santiago de
Compostela 15706, Spain. (6)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona
08036, Spain. (7)Research Lab for Pediatrics and Nephrology, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Semmelweis University, 1st Department of Pediatrics, Budapest 1083,
Hungary. (8)1] Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department
of Oncology and Hematology, IDIBAPS, CIBERehd, Barcelona 08036, Spain [2] James
Graham Brown Cancer Center, Louisville, KY 40202, USA [3] ICREA, Barcelona 08010,
Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):194-5.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a B-cell malignancy characterized by a poor
response to treatment and prognosis. Constitutive activation of different
signaling pathways in subsets of MCLs, through genetic and/or nongenetic
alterations, endows tumor cells with enhanced proliferation and reduced
apoptosis. The canonical Wnt pathway (ß-catenin/TCF-LEF), implicated in the
pathogenesis of numerous cancers, is constitutively active in half of MCLs. Here,
we show that ZEB1, a transcription factor better known for promoting metastasis
in carcinomas, is expressed in primary MCLs with active Wnt signaling. ZEB1
expression in MCL cells depends on Wnt, being downregulated by ß-catenin
knockdown or blocking of Wnt signaling by salinomycin. Knockdown of ZEB1 reduces 
in vitro cell viability and proliferation in MCL cells, and, importantly, tumor
growth in mouse xenograft models. ZEB1 activates proliferation-associated (HMGB2,
UHRF1, CENPF, MYC, MKI67, and CCND1) and anti-apoptotic (MCL1, BCL2, and BIRC5)
genes and inhibits pro-apoptotic ones (TP53, BBC3, PMAIP1, and BAX). We show that
ZEB1 expression in MCL cells determines differential resistance to chemotherapy
drugs and regulates transporters involved in drug influx/efflux. Downregulation
of ZEB1 by salinomycin increases the sensitivity of MCL cells to the cytotoxic
effect of doxorubicin, cytarabine and gemcitabine. Lastly, salinomycin and
doxorubicin display a synergistic effect in established and primary MCL cells.
These results identify ZEB1 in MCL where it promotes cell proliferation, enhanced
tumor growth and a differential response to chemotherapy drugs. ZEB1 could thus
potentially become a predictive biomarker and therapeutic target in this
lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3890947
PMID: 24013721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Urol. 2014 Feb;191(2):479-86. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.08.052. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Expression and prognostic significance of a comprehensive epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition gene set in renal cell carcinoma.

Chen D(1), Gassenmaier M(2), Maruschke M(3), Riesenberg R(2), Pohla H(2), Stief
CG(4), Zimmermann W(2), Buchner A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University Hospital, Munich, Germany; Department of
Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: dong.chen@med.uni-muenchen.de. (2)Tumor Immunology
Laboratory, LIFE Center, Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Urology, University of
Rostock, Rostock, Germany. (4)Department of Urology, University Hospital, Munich,
Germany. (5)Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

PURPOSE: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition enhances tumor cell motility and has a
critical role in invasion and metastasis in a number of carcinomas. A set of
transcription factors acts as a master regulator of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition process. To our knowledge it is unknown whether epithelial-mesenchymal
transition is important for clear cell renal cell carcinoma progression.
Therefore, we comprehensively assessed mRNA levels of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition associated genes in renal cell carcinoma as well as their prognostic
relevance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We determined the expression of a set of 46
epithelial-mesenchymal transition related genes by oligonucleotide microarray and
gene set enrichment analyses using RNA from 14 samples each of normal kidneys,
and G1 and G3 primary renal cell carcinomas. Expression of select
epithelial-mesenchymal transition genes was validated by real-time polymerase
chain reaction in normal kidneys, primary renal cell carcinomas and metastases in
an independent cohort of 112 patients. Results were combined with followup data
for survival analysis.
RESULTS: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition gene set was preferentially
expressed in primary renal cell carcinoma compared to normal tissue (false
discovery rate 0.01). No difference was found between G1 and G3 tumors.
Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction revealed
down-regulation of critical epithelial-mesenchymal transition genes such as CDH2 
and ZEB1 in metastases, suggesting epithelial-mesenchymal transition reversal
during metastasis. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated a better outcome in
patients with low CXCR4, vimentin, fibronectin and TWIST1 mRNA levels.
Multivariate analyses revealed that CXCR4 and VIM up-regulation represents an
independent prognostic marker for poor cancer specific survival in patients with 
renal cell carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data provide strong evidence that
epithelial-mesenchymal transition occurs in renal cell carcinoma. Thus,
interference with epithelial-mesenchymal transition in renal cell carcinoma might
represent a future therapeutic option.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24012533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2625-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.028. Epub
2013 Sep 4.

Silibinin inhibits ß-catenin/ZEB1 signaling and suppresses bladder cancer
metastasis via dual-blocking epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stemness.

Wu K(1), Ning Z, Zeng J, Fan J, Zhou J, Zhang T, Zhang L, Chen Y, Gao Y, Wang B, 
Guo P, Li L, Wang X, He D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.

Muscle-invasive bladder cancer is associated with a high frequency of metastasis,
and fewer therapies substantially prolong survival. Silibinin, a nontoxic natural
flavonoid, has been shown to exhibit pleiotropic anticancer effects in many
cancer types, including bladder cancer. Our and other previous studies have
demonstrated that silibinin induced apoptosis and inhibited proliferation of
bladder cancer cells, whether silibinin could suppress bladder cancer metastasis 
has not been elucidated. In the present study, we utilized a novel highly
metastatic T24-L cell model, and found that silibinin treatment not only resulted
in the suppression of cell migration and invasion in vitro, but also decreased
bladder cancer lung metastasis and prolonged animal survival in vivo.
Mechanistically, silibinin could inhibit glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK3ß)
phosphorylation, ß-catenin nuclear translocation and transactivation, and ZEB1
gene transcription that subsequently regulated the expression of cytokeratins,
vimentin and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) to reverse epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT). On the other hand, silibinin inhibited ZEB1 expression and then
suppressed the properties of cancer stem cells (CSCs), which were evidenced as
decreased spheroid colony formation, side population, and the expression of stem 
cell factor CD44. Overall, this study reveals a novel mechanism for silibinin
targeting bladder cancer metastasis, in which inactivation of ß-catenin/ZEB1
signaling by silibinin leads to dual-block of EMT and stemness.

© 2013.

PMID: 24012496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Feb;53 Suppl 1:E161-8. doi: 10.1002/mc.22083. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

A role of zinc-finger protein 143 for cancer cell migration and invasion through 
ZEB1 and E-cadherin in colon cancer cells.

Paek AR(1), Lee CH, You HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology Branch, Division of Cancer Biology, National
Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi, South Korea.

To investigate the role of zinc-finger protein 143 in cancer cells, we stably
introduced ZNF143 expression knockdown by infecting colon cancer cells with short
hairpin (sh) RNA-lentiviral particles against ZNF143 (HCT116 sh-ZNF143). Compared
to sh-control cells, HCT116 sh-ZNF143 cells showed faster wound healing,
increased migration through Transwell chambers, and increased invasion through
Matrigel in Transwell chambers. ZNF143 knockdown increased transcriptional
expression of ZEB1. Additionally, ZNF143 regulated E-cadherin transcriptional
expression. Small interfering-RNA-mediated silencing of ZEB1 expression affected 
motility in HCT116 sh-ZNF143 cells. These data suggest that ZNF143 is involved in
cellular motility through a ZEB1-E-cadherin-linked pathway in colon cancer cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24009065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Dec;95(3):259-69. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2013.08.006. Epub
2013 Aug 30.

Epithelio-mesenchymal transitional attributes in oral sub-mucous fibrosis.

Das RK(1), Anura A, Pal M, Bag S, Majumdar S, Barui A, Chakraborty C, Ray AK,
Sengupta S, Paul RR, Chatterjee J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India.

Evaluating molecular attributes in association with its epithelial and
sub-epithelial changes of oral sub-mucous fibrosis is meaningful in exploring the
plausibility of an epithelio-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and malignant
potentiality of this pathosis. In this study histopathological and histochemical 
attributes for basement membrane and connective tissue in biopsies of oral
sub-mucous fibrosis (n = 55) and normal oral mucosa (n = 16) were assessed and
expressions of p63, E-cadherin, ß-catenin, N-cadherin and TWIST were analyzed
immunohistochemically. The p63 and its isoforms (TA and <U+2206>N), PARD3, E-cadherin
and ß-catenin were also assessed transcriptomically by q-PCR and EMT players like
TWIST1, ZEB1, MMP9 and micro-RNA 205 were searched in gene expression
microarrays. Oral epithelium demonstrating impairment in progressive maturation
in oral sub-mucous fibrosis concomitantly experienced an increase in basement
membrane thickness and collagen deposition along with alteration in target
molecular expressions. In comparison to non-dysplastic conditions dysplastic
stages exhibited significant increase in p63 and p63<U+2206>N expressions whereas,
E-cadherin and ß-catenin exhibited loss from the membrane with concurrent
increase in cytoplasm. Further the N-cadherin and TWIST were gained remarkably
along with the appearance of nuclear accumulation features of ß-catenin. The
microarray search had noticed the up-regulation of TWIST1, ZEB1 and MMP9 along
with down regulation of micro-RNA 205. The simultaneous increase in basement
membrane thickness and sub-epithelial collagen deposition were the plausible
indicators for increased matrix stiffness with expected impact on oral epithelial
functional homoeostasis. This was corroborated with the increase in expressions
of epithelial master regulator p63 and its oncogenic isoform (<U+2206>N) along with
membranous loss of E-cadherin (EMT hallmark) and its associate ß-catein and gain 
of mesenchymal markers like N-cadherin and TWIST. These also became indicative
for the induction of epithelial to mesenchymal transitional mechanism in oral
sub-mucous fibrosis when connoted here with the relevant modulation in
expressions of EMT regulators.

© 2013.

PMID: 23994666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Manag Res. 2013 Jul 31;5:187-95. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S35171. eCollection
2013.

The role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition programming in invasion and
metastasis: a clinical perspective.

Creighton CJ(1), Gibbons DL, Kurie JM.

Author information: 
(1)The Dan L Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA ;
Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA ; Department
of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, the University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in normal developmental
cellular processes, but it may also be co-opted by a subset of cancer cells, to
enable them to invade and form metastases at distant sites. Several gene
transcription factors regulate EMT, including Snail1, Snail2, Zeb1, Zeb2, and
Twist; ongoing studies continue to identify and elucidate other drivers. Specific
micro ribonucleic acids (RNAs) have also been found to regulate EMT, including
the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family, which targets Zeb1/Zeb2. Cancer "stem cells" -
with the ability to self-renew and to regenerate all the cell types within the
tumor - have been found to express EMT markers, further implicating both cancer
stem cells and EMT with metastasis. Microenvironmental cues, including
transforming growth factor-ß, can direct EMT tumor metastasis, such as by
regulating miR-200 expression. In human tumors, EMT markers and regulators may be
expressed in a subset of tumor cells, such as in cells at the invasive front or
tumor-microenvironment interface, though certain subtypes of cancer can show
widespread mesenchymal-like features. In terms of therapeutic targeting of EMT in
patients, potential areas of exploration could include targeting the cancer stem 
cell subpopulation, as well as microRNA-based therapeutics that reintroduce
miR-200. This review will examine evidence for a role of EMT in invasion and
metastasis, with the focus being on studies in lung and breast cancers. We also
carry out analyses of publicly-available gene expression profiling datasets in
order to show how EMT-associated genes appear coordinately expressed across human
tumor specimens.

PMCID: PMC3754282
PMID: 23986650  [PubMed]


25. Am J Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 14;3(4):374-89. eCollection 2013.

Effect of epigenetic histone modifications on E-cadherin splicing and expression 
in lung cancer.

Liao W(1), Jordaan G, Srivastava MK, Dubinett S, Sharma S, Sharma S.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA West Los Angeles VA Medical Center, Division of Hematology Oncology Los
Angeles, California.

We have identified an alternatively spliced, non-functional aberrant E-cadherin
transcript that lacks exon 11 and is over expressed in malignant cells as
compared to the normal non-malignant cells. This increase in the aberrant
transcript is a mechanism of loss of E-cadherin gene expression as it is rapidly 
degraded by the nonsense mediated decay pathway. To study the mechanism of this
gene missplicing we analyzed the role of histone epigenetic modifications in lung
cancer cell lines. The treatment of low E-cadherin lung cancer cell lines with
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi, MS-275) resulted in the preferential
expression of the correctly spliced transcripts in the low E-cadherin expressing 
cell lines only. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that the
histone hypoacetylation levels correlate with aberrant exon 11 splicing as there 
is more aberrant splicing in cell lines with E-cadherin promoter hypoacetylation.
Inactivation of histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1, 2 and 3 resulted in an increase in
E-cadherin expression and an increase in the ratio of the correctly spliced
E-cadherin transcript. As transcription of the gene is closely linked to
splicing, we considered the possibility that change in E-cadherin transcription
correlates with splicing. The Zeb1 epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT)
inducer silences E-cadherin expression and could also alter the splicing of this 
exon. Inhibition of the E-cadherin promoter transcription with Zeb1 expression
increases aberrant splicing and the reverse is observed when Zeb1 is knocked
down. The role of HDAC inhibitors was also studied in vivo in a immunodeficient
mouse xenograft model. Exposure of mice to HDACi resulted in growth inhibition,
increase in E-cadherin expression, alteration of aberrant splicing and the
reversal of EMT in mouse tumors. The findings support the modulation of
E-cadherin exon 11 inclusion or exclusion by histone epigenetic modifications as 
they change the overall chromatin structure. The results provide an interesting
link between epigenetic alterations in cancer cells and gene splicing in addition
to their effect on gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC3744017
PMID: 23977447  [PubMed]


26. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 10;33(28):3707-16. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.332. Epub 2013 Aug
26.

Significance of PELP1/HDAC2/miR-200 regulatory network in EMT and metastasis of
breast cancer.

Roy SS(1), Gonugunta VK(1), Bandyopadhyay A(2), Rao MK(3), Goodall GJ(4), Sun
LZ(3), Tekmal RR(5), Vadlamudi RK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, UT Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA. (2)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, UT Health
Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)1] Department of Cellular and Structural
Biology, UT Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA [2] Cancer Therapy and
Research Center, UT Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (4)Center for
Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Department of Medicine, School of Molecular and
Biomedical science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(5)1] Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, UT Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA [2] Cancer Therapy and Research Center, UT Health Science
Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Tumor metastasis is the leading cause of death among breast cancer patients.
PELP1 (proline, glutamic acid and leucine rich protein 1) is a nuclear receptor
coregulator that is upregulated during breast cancer progression to metastasis
and is an independent prognostic predictor of shorter survival of breast cancer
patients. Here, we show that PELP1 modulates expression of metastasis-influencing
microRNAs (miRs) to promote cancer metastasis. Whole genome miR array analysis
using PELP1-overexpressing and PELP1-underexpressing model cells revealed that
miR-200 and miR-141 levels inversely correlated with PELP1 expression. Consistent
with this, PELP1 knockdown resulted in lower expression of miR-200a target genes 
ZEB1 and ZEB2. PELP1 knockdown significantly reduced tumor growth and metastasis 
compared with parental cells in an orthotopic xenograft tumor model. Furthermore,
re-introduction of miR-200a and miR-141 mimetics into PELP1-overexpressing cells 
reversed PELP1 target gene expression, decreased PELP1-driven migration/invasion 
in vitro and significantly reduced in vivo metastatic potential in a preclinical 
model of experimental metastasis. Our results demonstrated that PELP1 binds to
miR-200a and miR-141 promoters and regulates their expression by recruiting
chromatin modifier histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) as revealed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, small interfering RNA and HDAC inhibitor assays. Taken
together, our results suggest that PELP1 regulates tumor metastasis by
controlling the expression and functions of the tumor metastasis suppressors
miR-200a and miR-141.

PMCID: PMC3935988
PMID: 23975430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 26;33(26):3374-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.337. Epub 2013 Aug
26.

IBP regulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and the motility of breast
cancer cells via Rac1, RhoA and Cdc42 signaling pathways.

Zhang Z(1), Yang M(1), Chen R(2), Su W(3), Li P(1), Chen S(1), Chen Z(1), Chen
A(1), Li S(1), Hu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Laboratory Science,
Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, China. (3)Department of Medical Laboratory, Beibei Maternal and Child 
Health Hospital, Chongqing, China.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial process for the invasion 
and metastasis of epithelial tumors. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
this transition are poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that
interferon regulatory factor 4 binding protein (IBP) regulates EMT and the
motility of breast cancer cells through Rac1, RhoA and Cdc42 signaling pathways. 
We found that increased expression of IBP was associated with the progression of 
breast cancer and that IBP protein levels were significantly elevated in matched 
distant metastases. High IBP levels also predict shorter overall survival of
breast cancer patients. Furthermore, the forced expression of IBP decreased the
expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin but increased the mesenchymal
markers in breast cancer cells. In contrast, silencing IBP in metastatic breast
tumor cells promoted a shift toward an epithelial morphology concomitant with
increased expression of E-cadherin and decreased expression of mesenchymal
markers. IBP silencing also reduced the expression of EMT-inducing transcription 
factors (Snail, Slug, ZEB1 and ZEB2). Moreover, we identified a role for IBP in
endogenous EMT induced by epidermal growth factor (EGF) and deletion of IBP
attenuated EGF receptor (EGFR) signaling in breast cancer cells. Furthermore, IBP
regulates the migration, invasion and matrix metalloprotease production in breast
cancer cells as well as actin cytoskeleton rearrangement and the activation of
GTP-Rac1, GTP-RhoA and GTP-Cdc42. Taken together, our findings demonstrate an
oncogenic property for IBP in promoting the metastatic potential of breast cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC4078416
PMID: 23975422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Lett. 2013 Nov 28;341(1):41-5. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.08.027. Epub
2013 Aug 21.

Deadly crosstalk: Notch signaling at the intersection of EMT and cancer stem
cells.

Espinoza I(1), Miele L.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS,
United States; Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical
Center, Jackson, MS, United States.

Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved pathway involved in cell fate
control during development, stem cell self-renewal and postnatal tissue
differentiation. Roles for Notch in carcinogenesis, in the biology of cancer stem
cells, tumor angiogenesis and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) have
been reported. This mini-review describes the role of Notch signaling
deregulation in EMT and tumor aggressiveness. We describe how accumulated
evidence suggests that Notch inhibition is an attractive strategy for the
treatment of several cancers, at least in part because of its potential to
reverse or prevent EMT.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23973264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 1;12(17):2713-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.26075. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Poised with purpose: cell plasticity enhances tumorigenicity.

Marjanovic ND(1), Weinberg RA, Chaffer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research; Cambridge, MA USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2013 Jul 3;154(1):61-74.

PMCID: PMC3899180
PMID: 23966153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:902467. doi: 10.1155/2013/902467. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

miR-1279, miR-548j, miR-548m, and miR-548d-5p binding sites in CDSs of paralogous
and orthologous PTPN12, MSH6, and ZEB1 Genes.

Ivashchenko AT(1), Issabekova AS, Berillo OA.

Author information: 
(1)National Nanotechnology Laboratory, Al-Farabi Kazakh National University,
Almaty 050038, Kazakhstan. a ivashchenko@mail.ru

Only PTPN12, MSH6, and ZEB1 have significant miR-1279 binding sites among
paralogous genes of human tyrosine phosphatase family, DNA mismatch repair
family, and zinc finger family, respectively. All miRNA binding sites are located
within CDSs of studied mRNAs. Nucleotide sequences of hsa-miR-1279 binding sites 
with mRNAs of human PTPN12, MSH6, and ZEB1 genes encode TKEQYE, EGSSDE, and
GEKPYE oligopeptides, respectively. The conservation of miRNA binding sites
encoding oligopeptides has been revealed. MRNAs of many paralogs of zinc finger
gene family have from 1 to 12 binding sites coding the same GEKPYE hexapeptide.
MRNAs of PTPN12, MSH6, and ZEB1 orthologous genes from different animal species
have binding sites for hsa-miR-1279 which consist of homologous oligonucleotides 
encoding similar human oligopeptides TKEQYE, EGSSDE, and GEKPYE. MiR-548j,
miR-548m, and miR-548d-5p have homologous binding sites in the mRNA of PTPN12
orthologous genes which encode PRTRSC, TEATDI, and STASAT oligopeptides,
respectively. All regions of miRNA are important for binding with the mRNA.

PMCID: PMC3730384
PMID: 23957009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. FEBS Lett. 2013 Sep 17;587(18):3115-21. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.07.049. Epub 
2013 Aug 14.

Sal-like 4 (SALL4) suppresses CDH1 expression and maintains cell dispersion in
basal-like breast cancer.

Itou J(1), Matsumoto Y, Yoshikawa K, Toi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Malignancy Control Research, Medical Innovation Center,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
junji-itou@umin.ac.jp

In cell cultures, the dispersed phenotype is indicative of the migratory ability.
Here we characterized Sal-like 4 (SALL4) as a dispersion factor in basal-like
breast cancer. Our shRNA-mediated SALL4 knockdown system and SALL4 overexpression
system revealed that SALL4 suppresses the expression of adhesion gene CDH1, and
positively regulates the CDH1 suppressor ZEB1. Cell behavior analyses showed that
SALL4 suppresses intercellular adhesion and maintains cell motility after
cell-cell interaction and cell division, which results in the dispersed
phenotype. Our findings indicate that SALL4 functions to suppress CDH1 expression
and to maintain cell dispersion in basal-like breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23954296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 15;73(20):6299-309. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4082. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor suppression are controlled by a
reciprocal feedback loop between ZEB1 and Grainyhead-like-2.

Cieply B(1), Farris J, Denvir J, Ford HL, Frisch SM.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center and Department of
Biochemistry, West Virginia University, Morgantown; Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia; and Departments
of Biochemistry/Molecular Genetics and Obstetrics/Gynecology, University of
Colorado, Denver, Colorado.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in carcinoma cells enhances malignant
progression by promoting invasion and survival. EMT is induced by
microenvironmental factors, including TGF-ß and Wnt agonists, and by the
E-box-binding transcription factors Twist, Snail, and ZEB. Grainyhead-like-2
(GRHL2), a member of the mammalian Grainyhead family of wound-healing regulatory 
transcription factors, suppresses EMT and restores sensitivity to anoikis by
repressing ZEB1 expression and inhibiting TGF-ß signaling. In this study, we
elucidate the functional relationship between GRHL2 and ZEB1 in EMT/MET and tumor
biology. At least three homeodomain proteins, Six1, LBX1, and HoxA5,
transactivated the ZEB1 promoter, in the case of Six1, through direct
protein-promoter interaction. GRHL2 altered the Six1-DNA complex, inhibiting this
transactivation. Correspondingly, GRHL2 expression prevented tumor initiation in 
xenograft assays, sensitized breast cancer cells to paclitaxel, and suppressed
the emergence of CD44(high)CD24(low) cells (defining the cancer stem cell
phenotype in the cell type studied). GRHL2 was downregulated in recurrent mouse
tumors that had evolved to an oncogene-independent, EMT-like state, supporting a 
role for GRHL2 downregulation in this phenotypic transition, modeling disease
recurrence. The combination of TGF-ß and Wnt activation repressed GRHL2
expression by direct interaction of ZEB1 with the GRHL2 promoter, inducing EMT.
Together, our observations indicate that a reciprocal feedback loop between GRHL2
and ZEB1 controls epithelial versus mesenchymal phenotypes and EMT-driven tumor
progression.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3806457
PMID: 23943797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Anal Biochem. 2013 Dec 1;443(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2013.08.002. Epub 2013
Aug 9.

A quantitative method to identify microRNAs targeting a messenger RNA using a
3'UTR RNA affinity technique.

Shi M(1), Han W, Spivack SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

The identification of specific microRNAs (miRNAs) that target a given messenger
RNA (mRNA) is essential for studies in gene regulation, but the available
bioinformatic software programs are often unreliable. We have developed a unique 
experimental miRNA affinity assay whereby a 3'UTR RNA is end-labeled with biotin,
immobilized, and then used as a bait sequence for affinity pull-down of miRNAs.
After washes and release, cloning and sequencing identify the miRNAs. Binding
affinity is quantitated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR),
comparing released and original input concentrations. As an initial
demonstration, the TCF8/ZEB1 mRNA affinity pull-down yielded miR-200 family
member miRs in the majority of clones, and binding affinity was approximately
100%; virtually all copies of miR-200c bound the immobilized mRNA transcript. For
validation in cells, miR-200c strongly inhibited expression of a TCF8 luciferase 
reporter, native TCF8 mRNA, and protein levels, which contrasted with other
recovered miRNAs with lower binding affinities. For Smad4 mRNA, miR-150 (and
others) displayed a binding affinity of 39% (or less) yet did not inhibit a Smad4
reporter, native Smad4 mRNA, or protein levels. These results were not predicted 
by available software. This work demonstrates this miRNA binding affinity assay
to be a novel yet facile experimental means of identification of miRNAs targeting
a given mRNA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4112567
PMID: 23938772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Lett. 2013 Nov 28;341(1):105-10. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.08.001. Epub
2013 Aug 7.

Technical considerations for analyzing EMT-MET data from surgical samples.

Aoyagi K(1), Tamaoki M, Nishumura T, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

With an increase of neoadjuvant therapy, biopsy samples have become imperative
for cancer research; however, what kind of difference between surgical and
endoscopic biopsy samples in gene expression profiles was still unclear.
Recently, we reported artificially induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(aiEMT) in the surgical samples by comparison between gene expression profiles of
both samples of the esophagus. This was also found in mouse epithelium under an
ischemic condition for 4h. This study will evoke underestimation of the
prognostic evaluation power of EMT related markers in past cancer research and
prevalence of biopsy samples for in vivo expression profiling with low biases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Dermatol Sci. 2013 Nov;72(2):93-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.07.001. Epub 
2013 Jul 15.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers are associated with an increased
metastatic risk in primary cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas but are attenuated 
in lymph node metastases.

Toll A(1), Masferrer E, Hernández-Ruiz ME, Ferrandiz-Pulido C, Yébenes M, Jaka A,
Tuneu A, Jucglà A, Gimeno J, Baró T, Casado B, Gandarillas A, Costa I, Mojal S,
Peña R, de Herreros AG, García-Patos V, Pujol RM, Hernández-Muñoz I.

Author information: 
(1)Servei de Dermatologia, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain;
Cancer Research Program, IMIM (Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions
Mèdiques), Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: atoll@parcdesalutmar.cat.

BACKGROUND: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the second most common
malignancy in humans and approximately 5% metastasize, usually to regional lymph 
nodes. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process involving loss of 
intercellular adhesion, acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype and enhanced
migratory potential; epithelial markers, such as E-cadherin, are down-regulated
and mesenchymal proteins (Vimentin), increased.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of EMT markers in metastatic SCC (MSCC) 
and their corresponding metastases, and to correlate them with
clinico-pathological factors associated with an increased risk of metastasis.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study that included 146 cSCC samples (51
primary non-metastatic, 56 primary metastatic, 39 lymphatic metastases).
Immunohistochemistry for E-cadherin, Vimentin, Snail, beta-catenin, Twist, Zeb1
and Podoplanin was performed.
RESULTS: Loss of membranous E-cadherin was observed in 77% cSCCs, with no
differences between MSCC and non-MSCC. Among the transcriptional factors
controlling EMT, no significant Snail1 expression was detected. Twist, Zeb1,
Vimentin, beta-catenin and Podoplanin were significantly overexpressed in MSCCs. 
Twist ectopic expression in SCC13 cells induced Zeb1, Vimentin and Podoplanin
expression and E-cadherin delocalization. These changes resulted in a scattered
migration pattern in vitro. Expression of EMT markers was decreased in the
metastases when compared with the corresponding primary tumors.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that a partial EMT, characterized by the
expression of Twist but without a total E-cadherin depletion, is involved in the 
acquisition of invasive traits by cSCC, but the process is downregulated in lymph
node metastases.

Copyright © 2013 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23928229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Hazard Mater. 2013 Oct 15;261:172-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2013.07.030. Epub 
2013 Jul 22.

Phenanthrene causes ocular developmental toxicity in zebrafish embryos and the
possible mechanisms involved.

Huang L(1), Wang C, Zhang Y, Wu M, Zuo Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China.

Recent studies show that polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) may be a
candidate cause of developmental defects of the retina, but the mechanism is
still unclear. We evaluated the mechanism(s) underlying PAH-induced retinal
development defects due to exposure to environmental concentrations of
Phenanthrene (Phe) in zebrafish. We found that exposure to environmental
concentrations of Phe caused obvious morphological changes, developmental
retardation, apoptosis, and reduction of cell proliferation in the retina. Our
results indicated that Phe could cause visual system developmental defects. Phe
exposure up-regulated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (Mtif) expression, and
down-regulated zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (Zeb1) and paired box 6
(Pax6). Moreover, we demonstrated that AhR was a repressor of Zeb1. We propose
that Phe's ocular toxicity is mediated by up-regulating AhR, which then
down-regulates Zeb1, in turn inducing Mitf expression while inhibiting Pax6
expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23921180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Oct;12(10):2213-25. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0104.
Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Subtype-specific MEK-PI3 kinase feedback as a therapeutic target in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma.

Mirzoeva OK(1), Collisson EA, Schaefer PM, Hann B, Hom YK, Ko AH, Korn WM.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: W. Michael Korn, UCSF Divisions of Gastroenterology and 
Hematology/Oncology, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, 2340 Sutter
St., Box 1387, San Francisco, CA 94115. Michael.Korn@ucsf.edu.

Mutations in the KRAS oncogene are dominant features in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA). Because KRAS itself is considered "undruggable," targeting 
pathways downstream of KRAS are being explored as a rational therapeutic
strategy. We investigated the consequences of MAP-ERK kinase (MEK) inhibition in 
a large PDA cell line panel. Inhibition of MEK activated phosphoinositide
3-kinase in an EGF receptor (EGFR)-dependent fashion and combinations of MEK and 
EGFR inhibitors synergistically induced apoptosis. This combinatorial effect was 
observed in the epithelial but not mesenchymal subtype of PDA. RNA expression
analysis revealed predictors of susceptibility to the combination, including
E-cadherin, HER3, and the miR200-family of microRNAs, whereas expression of the
transcription factor ZEB1 was associated with resistance to the drug combination.
Knockdown of HER3 in epithelial-type and ZEB1 in mesenchymal-type PDA cell lines 
resulted in sensitization to the combination of MEK and EGFR inhibitors. Thus,
our findings suggest a new, subtype-specific, and personalized therapeutic
strategy for pancreatic cancer.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3800201
PMID: 23918833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2013 Nov;26(6):861-73. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12149. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

GLI2 cooperates with ZEB1 for transcriptional repression of CDH1 expression in
human melanoma cells.

Perrot CY(1), Gilbert C, Marsaud V, Postigo A, Javelaud D, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Team 'TGF-ß and Oncogenesis', Orsay, France; INSERM U1021,
Orsay, France; CNRS UMR 3347, Orsay, France.

In melanoma cells, high expression of the transcription factor GLI2 is associated
with increased invasive potential and loss of E-cadherin expression, an event
reminiscent of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Herein, we provide
evidence that GLI2 represses E-cadherin gene (CDH1) expression in melanoma cells 
via distinct mechanisms, enhancing transcription of the EMT-activator ZEB1 and
cooperative repression of CDH1 gene transcription via direct binding of both GLI2
and ZEB1 to two closely positioned Kruppel-like factor-binding sites within the
CDH1 promoter. GLI2 silencing rescued CDH1 expression except in melanoma cell
lines in which the CDH1 promoter was hypermethylated. Proximity ligation assays
identified GLI2-ZEB1 complexes in melanoma cell nuclei, proportional to
endogenous GLI2 and ZEB1 expression, and whose accumulation was enhanced by the
classical EMT inducer TGF-ß. These data identify GLI2 as a critical modulator of 
the cadherin switch in melanoma, a molecular process that is critical for
metastatic spread of the disease.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23890107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(11):1896-903.

A family of pleiotropically acting microRNAs in cancer progression, miR-200:
potential cancer therapeutic targets.

Zhang HF, Xu LY, Li EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shantou University Medical
College, No.22, Xinling Road, Shantou 515041, Guangdong, China. nmli@stu.edu.cn.

Recently, a group of microRNAs (miRNAs), the miR-200 family (miR-200s) has been
found to be deregulated in multiple types of cancers, in which this family of
miRNAs was demonstrated to play a pivotal role in tumor initiation, maintenance, 
malignant metastasis and chemotherapy resistance. By targeting several central
inducers of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), e.g. ZEB1, ZEB2 and
SLUG, miR-200s are currently recognized as master regulators of EMT, thereby
suppressing cancer invasion and metastasis. The involvement of miR-200s in
angiogenesis has also been reported, and they were found to directly target
VEGF-A, FLT1/VEGFR1 and KDR/VEGFR2, three key components of the VEGF signaling
pathway. Importantly, miR-200s also modulate the self-renewal ability of cancer
stem cells by targeting BMI1 and SUZ12. Aberrant expression of miR-200s has been 
shown to confer chemoresistant properties to various kinds of cancers. Thus,
miR-200s, by playing critical and pleiotropic roles in malignancies, are
promising targets for cancer therapy. Notably, it has been shown that several
types of natural agents and herbal extracts could be employed to manipulate the
expression of miR-200s, making the targeting of miR-200s in cancer therapy more
clinically attractive. Nevertheless, a very recent study reported a
metastasis-promoting role of miR-200s in breast cancer; thus, careful assessment 
should be conducted before applying therapeutic interventions using miR-200s as
treatment targets. In this review, we will focus on our emerging understanding of
the roles of miR- 200s in cancer, specifically their therapeutic potential in
treating cancer.

PMID: 23888967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochemistry. 2013 Aug 13;52(32):5482-90. doi: 10.1021/bi400340g. Epub 2013 Jul
29.

Coordinated regulation of ß-tubulin isotypes and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition protein ZEB1 in breast cancer cells.

Lobert S(1), Graichen ME, Morris K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 North State 
Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA. slobert@umc.edu

The regulation of ß-tubulin isotypes, the primary targets for antimitotic
chemotherapeutic drugs like taxanes, has implications for drug response and drug 
resistance. Over the past 15 years, micro-RNAs have been studied widely as
regulators of mRNA levels. For example, the tumor suppressor miR-200c was shown
in cell culture to target mesenchymal genes, including ZEB1 [ Cochrane ( 2009 )
Mol. Cancer Ther. 8 ( 5 ), 1055 - 1066 ]. In that work, exogenous miR-200c was
also shown to reduce ß-tubulin class III, one of its predicted targets.
Furthermore, decreased miR-200c and increased ß-tubulin class III were associated
with poor outcomes for ovarian cancer patients [ Cittelly , D.M. ( 2012 ) Mol.
Cancer Ther. 11 ( 12 ), 2556 - 2565 ]. Because miR-200c targets the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal inducer ZEB1, we wanted to know whether changes in ZEB1
parallel ß-tubulin isotype changes, implicating ß-tubulin isotypes in
ZEB1-associated cell survival pathways. We found coordinated positive feedback
regulation of mRNA for ZEB1 and ß-tubulin isotype classes I, III, and IVB in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, commonly used as a model for triple-negative
breast cancers. Low levels of paclitaxel (40 nM) were found to significantly
reduce mRNA levels for these tubulin genes along with a 2-3-fold increase in
miR-200c. ZEB1 silencing also reduced ß-tubulin isotype classes I, III, and IVB
mRNA, whereas upregulation of ZEB1 was associated with increases in these isotype
classes. Our work indicates that paclitaxel-induced reduction of ZEB1 and
ß-tubulin isotypes are, in part, due to increased activity of miR-200c. These
results suggest that in aggressive breast cancers, as modeled by MDA-MB-231
cells, ß-tubulin class III is a biomarker for cell survival mediated through
ZEB1-induced tumor progression pathways.

PMID: 23869586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:262796. doi: 10.1155/2013/262796.
Epub 2013 Jun 3.

The Phytochemical Shikonin Stimulates Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) in 
Skin Wound Healing.

Yin SY(1), Peng AP, Huang LT, Wang YT, Lan CW, Yang NS.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia
Road, Section 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Although various pharmacological activities of the shikonins have been
documented, understanding the hierarchical regulation of these diverse
bioactivities at the genome level is unsubstantiated. In this study, through
cross examination between transcriptome and microRNA array analyses, we predicted
that topical treatment of shikonin in vivo affects epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and the expression of related microRNAs, including 200a, 200b,
200c, 141, 205, and 429 microRNAs, in mouse skin tissues. In situ
immunohistological analyses further demonstrated that specific EMT regulatory
molecules are enhanced in shikonin-treated epidermal tissues. RT-PCR analyses
subsequently confirmed that shikonin treatment downregulated expression of
microRNA-205 and other members of the 200 family microRNAs. Further, expression
of two RNA targets of the 200 family microRNAs in EMT regulation, Sip1 (Zeb2) and
Tcf8 (Zeb1), was consistently upregulated by shikonin treatment. Enhancement of
these EMT activities was also detected in shikonin-treated wounds, which repaired
faster than controls. These results suggest that topical treatment with shikonin 
can confer a potent stimulatory effect on EMT and suppress the expression of the 
associated microRNAs in skin wound healing. Collectively, these cellular and
molecular data provide further evidence in support of our previous findings on
the specific pharmacological effects of shikonin in wound healing and immune
modulation.

PMCID: PMC3686062
PMID: 23861701  [PubMed]


42. Hum Pathol. 2013 Oct;44(10):1973-81. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.04.009. Epub
2013 Jul 8.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and stem cells in endometrial cancer.

Mirantes C(1), Espinosa I, Ferrer I, Dolcet X, Prat J, Matias-Guiu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Genetics and Research Laboratory,
Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, University of Lleida, IRBLLEIDA, 25198, 
Lleida, Spain.

This review article describes the main features of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and its possible role in understanding myometrial invasion in
endometrial carcinoma (EC), as well as the development of malignant mixed
Müllerian tumor (MMMT). Moreover, the article discusses the possible role of
somatic (SSC) and cancer stem cells (CSC) in EC. Different transcriptional
repressors of E-cadherin have been identified in EMT, including Snail and Slug,
ZEB1 and ZEB2, and E47 and Twist. The expression of some of these genes is
increased at the myoinvasive front and correlates inversely with E-cadherin
inmunoreactivity. Whereas the transient occurrence of the EMT phenomenon is
important for myometrial invasion in conventional EC, MMMT shows permanent
expression of EMT leading to repression of E-cadherin and increased expression of
mesenchymal markers including proteins involved in skeletal muscle development.
An SSC population, identified as a side population, assessed by the Hoechst dye
exclusion test has been identified in human endometrium. CSCs have been defined
in analogy to SSC as cancer cells that have the capacity to self-renew, which
means undergoing divisions that allow the generation of more identical CSCs and
give rise to the variety of more differentiated cells found in the malignancy.
Although published data show that CD133(+) cells retain the characteristics of
CSC, there is no conclusive evidence showing that CD133 is the universal marker
for EC stem cells. Finally, a possible role for endometrial stem cells in the
development of ovarian endometriosis and ovarian endometrioid carcinoma is
commented.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23845467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 2;8(7):e67686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067686. Print 2013.

MicroRNA-23b functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating Zeb1 in bladder
cancer.

Majid S(1), Dar AA, Saini S, Deng G, Chang I, Greene K, Tanaka Y, Dahiya R,
Yamamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, VA Medical Center and UCSF, San Francisco, California, 
USA. SMajid@urology.ucsf.edu

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression by
targeted repression of transcription and translation. In this study we show that 
miRNA-23b (miR-23b) acts as a tumor suppressor in bladder cancer. Quantitative
real-time PCR analysis showed that miR-23b is significantly down-regulated in
bladder cancer cell lines and tumor tissues compared to non-malignant cells and
normal tissue samples. We also demonstrate that miR-23b expression has a
potential to be diagnostic and prognostic biomarker in bladder cancer. High
miR-23b expression is positively correlated with higher overall survival of
bladder cancer patients as revealed by Kaplan-Meier analysis. ROC analysis showed
that miR-23b expression can distinguish between normal and bladder cancer
tissues. Further we elucidated the biological significance of miR-23b in bladder 
cancer. Over-expression of miR-23b in bladder cancer cells inhibited cell
proliferation and impaired colony formation. Fluorescence activated cell sorting 
(FACS) analysis revealed that re-expression of miR-23b in bladder cancer cells
induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis while inhibiting cell migration and
invasion. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that Zeb1, a crucial regulator 
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is a direct target of miR-23b in
bladder cancer. These results show that loss of miR-23b confers a proliferative
advantage and promotes bladder cancer cell migration and invasion. Furthermore,
re-expression of miR-23b may be a beneficial therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of human bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC3699593
PMID: 23844063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 15;73(18):5821-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1080. Epub 
2013 Jul 5.

ANTXR1, a stem cell-enriched functional biomarker, connects collagen signaling to
cancer stem-like cells and metastasis in breast cancer.

Chen D(1), Bhat-Nakshatri P, Goswami C, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Surgery, Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, and Pathology and Laboratory Medicine; and Centre for Computational
Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
Indiana.

Cancer stem-like cells are thought to contribute to tumor recurrence. The anthrax
toxin receptor 1 (ANTXR1) has been identified as a functional biomarker of normal
stem cells and breast cancer stem-like cells. Primary stem cell-enriched basal
cells (CD49f(+)/EpCAM(-)/Lin(-)) expressed higher levels of ANTXR1 compared with 
mature luminal cells. CD49f(+)/EpCAM(-), CD44(+)/EpCAM(-), CD44(+)/CD24(-), or
ALDEFLUOR-positive subpopulations of breast cancer cells were enriched for ANTXR1
expression. CD44(+)/CD24(-)/ANTXR1(+) cells displayed enhanced self-renewal as
measured by mammosphere assay compared with CD44(+)/CD24(-)/ANTXR1(-) cells.
Activation of ANTXR1 by its natural ligand C5A, a fragment of collagen VI a3,
increased stem cell self-renewal in mammosphere assays and Wnt signaling
including the expression of the Wnt receptor-lipoprotein receptor-related protein
6 (LRP6), phosphorylation of GSK3a/ß, and elevated expression of Wnt target
genes. RNAi-mediated silencing of ANTXR1 enhanced the expression of
luminal-enriched genes but diminished Wnt signaling including reduced LRP6 and
ZEB1 expression, self-renewal, invasion, tumorigenicity, and metastasis. ANTXR1
silencing also reduced the expression of HSPA1A, which is overexpressed in
metastatic breast cancer stem cells. Analysis of public databases revealed ANTXR1
amplification in medullary breast carcinoma and overexpression in estrogen
receptor-negative breast cancers with the worst outcome. Furthermore, ANTXR1 is
among the 10% most overexpressed genes in breast cancer and is coexpressed with
collagen VI. Thus, ANTXR1:C5A interactions bridge a network of collagen cleavage 
and remodeling in the tumor microenvironment, linking it to a stemness signaling 
network that drives metastatic progression.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3778138
PMID: 23832666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cell. 2013 Jul 3;154(1):61-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.005.

Poised chromatin at the ZEB1 promoter enables breast cancer cell plasticity and
enhances tumorigenicity.

Chaffer CL(1), Marjanovic ND, Lee T, Bell G, Kleer CG, Reinhardt F, D'Alessio AC,
Young RA, Weinberg RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
chaffer@wi.mit.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 Aug;13(8):519.
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 1;12(17):2713-4.

The recent discovery that normal and neoplastic epithelial cells re-enter the
stem cell state raised the intriguing possibility that the aggressiveness of
carcinomas derives not from their existing content of cancer stem cells (CSCs)
but from their proclivity to generate new CSCs from non-CSC populations. Here, we
demonstrate that non-CSCs of human basal breast cancers are plastic cell
populations that readily switch from a non-CSC to CSC state. The observed cell
plasticity is dependent on ZEB1, a key regulator of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. We find that plastic non-CSCs maintain the ZEB1 promoter in a
bivalent chromatin configuration, enabling them to respond readily to
microenvironmental signals, such as TGFß. In response, the ZEB1 promoter converts
from a bivalent to active chromatin configuration, ZEB1 transcription increases, 
and non-CSCs subsequently enter the CSC state. Our findings support a dynamic
model in which interconversions between low and high tumorigenic states occur
frequently, thereby increasing tumorigenic and malignant potential.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4015106
PMID: 23827675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Aug;5(8):1196-212. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201302827. Epub 2013 Jul 
1.

The ZEB1 pathway links glioblastoma initiation, invasion and chemoresistance.

Siebzehnrubl FA(1), Silver DJ, Tugertimur B, Deleyrolle LP, Siebzehnrubl D,
Sarkisian MR, Devers KG, Yachnis AT, Kupper MD, Neal D, Nabilsi NH, Kladde MP,
Suslov O, Brabletz S, Brabletz T, Reynolds BA, Steindler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
fas@ufl.edu

Glioblastoma remains one of the most lethal types of cancer, and is the most
common brain tumour in adults. In particular, tumour recurrence after surgical
resection and radiation invariably occurs regardless of aggressive chemotherapy. 
Here, we provide evidence that the transcription factor ZEB1 (zinc finger E-box
binding homeobox 1) exerts simultaneous influence over invasion, chemoresistance 
and tumourigenesis in glioblastoma. ZEB1 is preferentially expressed in invasive 
glioblastoma cells, where the ZEB1-miR-200 feedback loop interconnects these
processes through the downstream effectors ROBO1, c-MYB and MGMT. Moreover, ZEB1 
expression in glioblastoma patients is predictive of shorter survival and poor
Temozolomide response. Our findings indicate that this regulator of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition orchestrates key features of cancer stem cells 
in malignant glioma and identify ROBO1, OLIG2, CD133 and MGMT as novel targets of
the ZEB1 pathway. Thus, ZEB1 is an important candidate molecule for glioblastoma 
recurrence, a marker of invasive tumour cells and a potential therapeutic target,
along with its downstream effectors.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3944461
PMID: 23818228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 9;288(32):22993-3008. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.456293. Epub
2013 Jun 29.

Dual roles of the transcription factor grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) in breast
cancer.

Werner S(1), Frey S, Riethdorf S, Schulze C, Alawi M, Kling L, Vafaizadeh V,
Sauter G, Terracciano L, Schumacher U, Pantel K, Assmann V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Leibniz-Institute for Experimental Virology,
Virus Genomics, Hamburg, Germany.

Using a retrovirus-mediated cDNA expression cloning approach, we identified the
grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) transcription factor as novel protooncogene.
Overexpression of GRHL2 in NIH3T3 cells induced striking morphological changes,
an increase in cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, and tumor growth
in vivo. By combining a microarray analysis and a phylogenetic footprinting
analysis with various biochemical assays, we identified the epidermal growth
factor receptor family member Erbb3 as a novel GRHL2 target gene. In breast
cancer cell lines, shRNA-mediated knockdown of GRHL2 expression or functional
inactivation of GRHL2 using dominant negative GRHL2 proteins induces
down-regulation of ERBB3 gene expression, a striking reduction in cell
proliferation, and morphological and phenotypical alterations characteristic of
an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thus implying contradictory roles 
of GRHL2 in breast carcinogenesis. Interestingly, we could further demonstrate
that expression of GRHL2 is directly suppressed by the transcription factor zinc 
finger enhancer-binding protein 1 (ZEB1), which in turn is a direct target for
repression by GRHL2, suggesting that the EMT transcription factors GRHL2 and ZEB1
form a double negative regulatory feedback loop in breast cancer cells. Finally, 
a comprehensive immunohistochemical analysis of GRHL2 expression in primary
breast cancers showed loss of GRHL2 expression at the invasive front of primary
tumors. A pathophysiological relevance of GRHL2 in breast cancer metastasis is
further demonstrated by our finding of a statistically significant association
between loss of GRHL2 expression in primary breast cancers and lymph node
metastasis. We thus demonstrate a crucial role of GRHL2 in breast carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3743475
PMID: 23814079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Cell Sci. 2013 Sep 1;126(Pt 17):3990-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.129387. Epub 2013 Jun 
26.

Scribble regulates an EMT polarity pathway through modulation of MAPK-ERK
signaling to mediate junction formation.

Elsum IA(1), Martin C, Humbert PO.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle and Cancer Genetics, Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, Melbourne, Australia.

The crucial role the Crumbs and Par polarity complexes play in tight junction
integrity has long been established, however very few studies have investigated
the role of the Scribble polarity module. Here, we use MCF10A cells, which fail
to form tight junctions and express very little endogenous Crumbs3, to show that 
inducing expression of the polarity protein Scribble is sufficient to promote
tight junction formation. We show this occurs through an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) pathway that involves Scribble suppressing ERK
phosphorylation, leading to downregulation of the EMT inducer ZEB. Inhibition of 
ZEB relieves the repression on Crumbs3, resulting in increased expression of this
crucial tight junction regulator. The combined effect of this Scribble-mediated
pathway is the upregulation of a number of junctional proteins and the formation 
of functional tight junctions. These data suggests a novel role for Scribble in
positively regulating tight junction assembly through transcriptional regulation 
of an EMT signaling program.

PMID: 23813956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 15;73(16):5100-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0274. Epub
2013 Jun 28.

Acquired expression of NFATc1 downregulates E-cadherin and promotes cancer cell
invasion.

Oikawa T(1), Nakamura A, Onishi N, Yamada T, Matsuo K, Saya H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, Institute for Advanced Medical
Research, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.
oikawa_tsukasa@07.alumni.u-tokyo.ac.jp

NFATc1 is a transcription factor that regulates T-cell development,
osteoclastogenesis, and macrophage function. Given that T cells, osteoclasts, and
macrophages in the tumor microenvironment are thought to modulate tumor
progression, tumor cells may acquire NFATc1 expression through fusion with these 
NFATc1-expressing normal cells. We here revealed that a small proportion of tumor
cells in human carcinoma specimens expressed NFATc1. To investigate the
consequences of NFATc1 acquisition by tumor cells, we established A549 and MCF7
cell lines expressing a constitutively active form of NFATc1 (NFATc1CA) in an
inducible manner. The expression of NFATc1CA promoted cancer cell invasion in
association with changes in cell morphology. Analysis of gene expression and RNA 
interference experiments revealed that NFATc1CA suppressed E-cadherin expression 
by upregulating the transcriptional repressors Snail and Zeb1 in a manner
independent of TGF-ß signaling. Induced expression of NFATc1CA also downregulated
E-cadherin expression and increased invasive activity in tumor xenografts in
vivo. Our results thus suggest that the acquisition of NFATc1 expression
contributes to tumor progression.

PMID: 23811942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2013 Oct;131(10):1296-303. doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.405.

Further genetic and clinical insights of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy
3.

Liskova P(1), Palos M, Hardcastle AJ, Vincent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of the Biology and Pathology of the Eye, Institute of Inherited
Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, and
General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic2Department of
Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, and
General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

IMPORTANCE: Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) is a very rare
disorder characterized by primary changes of the posterior corneal layers.
Sequence variants in 3 genes are associated with the development of PPCD,
including ZEB1 that is responsible for PPCD3. Evidence suggests at least 1 more
gene remains to be identified.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the molecular genetic cause of PPCD3.
DESIGN: We performed extensive ophthalmological examination, including rotating
Scheimpflug imaging technology and specular microscopy, and direct sequencing of 
the ZEB1 coding region. Comprehensive review of published PPCD3-causing variants 
was undertaken.
SETTING: Ophthalmology department of a university hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: Four Czech probands.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Results of ophthalmological examination and direct
sequencing of the ZEB1 coding region.
RESULTS: The following 2 novel frameshift mutations within ZEB1 were identified: 
c.2617dup in exon 8 in a 22-year-old woman, considered to be most likely de novo 
in origin, and c.698dup in exon 6 in a 20-year-old man. The first patient had
mild changes consistent with PPCD and bilateral best-corrected visual acuity of
1.00. The corneal phenotype of the patient in the second case was more severe,
with best-corrected visual acuity of 0.40 OD and 0.05 OS. Corneas of both
probands were abnormally steep (keratometry readings, flat = 47.4 diopters [D]
and steep = 49.2 D) with increased pachymetry values but no pattern indicative of
keratoconus. Specular microscopy in both patients revealed reduced endothelial
cell density (range, 1055/mm² to 1655/mm²). Both probands had a history of
surgery for inguinal hernia; the male patient also reported hydrocele.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Nucleotide changes within the coding region of ZEB1
underlie the pathogenesis of PPCD in 4 of 23 Czech probands (17%). The cumulative
de novo ZEB1 mutation rate is at least 14%. Possible involvement of ZEB1 sequence
variants not readily identified by direct sequencing of coding regions needs to
be further investigated. Our findings also have implications for patient
counseling.

PMID: 23807282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Br J Cancer. 2013 Jul 23;109(2):452-61. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.305. Epub 2013 Jun 
27.

Dysregulation of miR-106a and miR-591 confers paclitaxel resistance to ovarian
cancer.

Huh JH(1), Kim TH, Kim K, Song JA, Jung YJ, Jeong JY, Lee MJ, Kim YK, Lee DH, An 
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, CHA University, 351 Yatap-dong, 
Seongnam, Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs are noncoding regulatory RNAs strongly implicated in
carcinogenesis, cell survival, and chemosensitivity. Here, microRNAs associated
with chemoresistance in ovarian carcinoma, the most lethal of gynaecological
malignancies, were identified and their functional effects in chemoresistant
ovarian cancer cells were assessed.
METHODS: MicroRNA expression in paclitaxel (PTX)-resistant SKpac sublines was
compared with that of the PTX-sensitive, parental SKOV3 ovarian cancer cell line 
using microarray and qRT-PCR. The function of differentially expressed microRNAs 
in chemoresistant ovarian cancer was further evaluated by apoptosis, cell
proliferation, and migration assays.
RESULTS: Upregulation of miR-106a and downregulation of miR-591 were associated
with PTX resistance in ovarian cancer cells and human tumour samples.
Transfection with anti-miR-106a or pre-miR-591 resensitized PTX-resistant SKpac
cells to PTX by enhancing apoptosis (23 and 42% increase), and inhibited their
cell migration (43 and 56% decrease) and proliferation (64 and 65% decrease).
Furthermore, ZEB1 was identified as a novel target gene of miR-591, and BCL10 and
caspase-7 were target genes of miR-106a, as identified by immunoblotting and
luciferase assay.
CONCLUSION: MiR-106a and miR-591 have important roles in conferring PTX
resistance to ovarian cancer cells. Modulation of these microRNAs resensitizes
PTX-resistant cancer cells by targeting BCL10, caspase-7, and ZEB1.

PMCID: PMC3721386
PMID: 23807165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;73(17):5416-25. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0362. Epub
2013 Jun 25.

FOXL1, a novel candidate tumor suppressor, inhibits tumor aggressiveness and
predicts outcome in human pancreatic cancer.

Zhang G(1), He P, Gaedcke J, Ghadimi BM, Ried T, Yfantis HG, Lee DH, Hanna N,
Alexander HR, Hussain SP.

Author information: 
(1)Pancreatic Cancer Unit, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer 
Research and Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

The forkhead box L1 (FOXL1) transcription factor regulates epithelial
proliferation and development of gastrointestinal tract and has been implicated
in gastrointestinal tumorigenesis in mouse models. However, the role of FOXL1 in 
pancreatic cancer development and progression remains to be elucidated. Here, we 
report that higher expression of FOXL1 is significantly associated with better
clinical outcome in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). A lower FOXL1 
expression is correlated with metastasis and advanced pathologic stage of
pancreatic cancer. Mechanistic analyses showed that overexpression of FOXL1
induces apoptosis and inhibits proliferation and invasion in pancreatic cancer
cells, whereas silencing of FOXL1 by siRNA inhibits apoptosis and enhances tumor 
cell growth and invasion. Furthermore, FOXL1 overexpression significantly
suppressed the growth of tumor xenografts in nude mice. FOXL1 promoted apoptosis 
partly through the induction of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) in 
pancreatic cancer cells. In addition, FOXL1 suppressed the transcription of zinc 
finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), an activator of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, and the negative regulation of ZEB1 contributed to the inhibitory
effect of FOXL1 on tumor cell invasion. Taken together, our findings suggest that
FOXL1 expression is a candidate predictor of clinical outcome in patients with
resected PDAC and it plays an inhibitory role in pancreatic tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3766408
PMID: 23801748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Oncogene. 2014 May 22;33(21):2768-78. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.233. Epub 2013 Jun
24.

Infiltrating bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells increase prostate cancer stem
cell population and metastatic ability via secreting cytokines to suppress
androgen receptor signaling.

Luo J(1), Ok Lee S(1), Liang L(1), Huang CK(1), Li L(1), Wen S(1), Chang C(2).

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY, USA. (2)1] George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research,
Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA [2] Sex
Hormone Research Center, China Medical University and Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Although the contribution of the bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) in 
cancer progression is emerging, their potential roles in prostate cancer (PCa)
remain unclear. Here, we showed that PCa cells could recruit BM-MSCs and
consequently the metastatic ability of PCa cells was increased. We also found
that the increased metastatic ability of PCa cells could be due to the increased 
PCa stem cell population. Mechanism dissection studies found that the
upregulation of Chemokine ligand 5 (CCL5) expression in BM-MSCs and PCa cells,
after MSCs infiltrated into the PCa cells, subsequently downregulated androgen
receptor (AR) signaling, which was due to inhibition of AR nuclear translocation.
Interruption of such signaling led to suppression of the BM-MSCs-induced PCa stem
cell population increase and thereby inhibited the metastatic ability of PCa
cells. The PCa stem cell increase then led to the upregulation of matrix
metalloproteinase 9, ZEB-1, CD133 and CXCR4 molecules, and enhanced the
metastatic ability of PCa cells. Therefore, we conclude that the BM-MSCs-mediated
increased metastatic ability of PCa cells can be due to the PCa stem cell
increase via alteration of the CCL5-AR signaling pathway. Together, these results
uncover the important roles of BM-MSCs as key components in the prostate tumor
microenvironment to promote PCa metastasis and may provide a new potential target
to suppress PCa metastasis by blocking BM-MSCs infiltration into PCa.

PMID: 23792449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Hum Pathol. 2013 Oct;44(10):2097-105. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.04.001. Epub
2013 Jun 20.

The nuclear protein expression levels of SNAI1 and ZEB1 are involved in the
progression and lymph node metastasis of cervical cancer via the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway.

Chen Z(1), Li S, Huang K, Zhang Q, Wang J, Li X, Hu T, Wang S, Yang R, Jia Y, Sun
H, Tang F, Zhou H, Shen J, Ma D, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, PR China;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wuhan General Hospital of Guangzhou
Military Command, Wuhan 430070, PR China.

Growing evidence illustrates that aberrant activation of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition plays a key role in tumor cell invasion and
metastasis. Transcription factors SNAI1 and ZEB1 regulate the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. To determine if SNAI1 and ZEB1 are involved in
the metastasis of cervical cancer, we used immunohistochemistry to evaluate the
expression of SNAI1, ZEB1, and vimentin in tumor and stromal compartments for a
large set of cervical carcinoma samples. Results were evaluated using an H score 
(percentage × intensity). Of 70 samples, 64 cases (91.43%) were positive for
SNAI1 expression. The median SNAI1 H score was 174.00 (range, 5-285). Sixty-seven
cases (95.71%) were positive for ZEB1, with a median H score of 165.77 (range,
5-260). Nuclear expression of SNAI1 and ZEB1 in tumor cells was positively
associated with International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO)
stages (P = .015 and P = .008, respectively) and lymph node metastasis (P = .007 
and P = .007, respectively); meanwhile, expression of vimentin in tumor cells was
positively associated with lymph node metastasis (P = .019). According to
negative vimentin expression, nuclear expression of ZEB1 in tumor cells was
positively associated with FIGO stages (P = .04). According to positive vimentin 
expression, nuclear expression of SNAI1 in tumor cells was positively associated 
with FIGO stages (P = .018) and pN (P = .029). In light of these findings, we
propose that SNAI1 and ZEB1 have the potential to be used as a novel predictor of
pelvic lymph node metastasis and represent promising therapeutic targets in
patients with cervical cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Pathol. 2013 Oct;231(2):210-22. doi: 10.1002/path.4224.

ß-Catenin activation contributes to the pathogenesis of adenomyosis through
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Oh SJ(1), Shin JH, Kim TH, Lee HS, Yoo JY, Ahn JY, Broaddus RR, Taketo MM, Lydon 
JP, Leach RE, Lessey BA, Fazleabas AT, Lim JM, Jeong JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Michigan State 
University, College of Human Medicine, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA; WCU
Biomodulation Major, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, 151-742, Republic of Korea.

Adenomyosis is defined by the presence of endometrial glands and stroma within
the myometrium. Despite its frequent occurrence, the precise aetiology and
physiopathology of adenomyosis is still unknown. WNT/ß-catenin signalling
molecules are important and should be tightly regulated for uterine function. To 
investigate the role of ß-catenin signalling in adenomyosis, the expression of
ß-catenin was examined. Nuclear and cytoplasmic ß-catenin expression was
significantly higher in epithelial cells of human adenomyosis compared to control
endometrium. To determine whether constitutive activation of ß-catenin in the
murine uterus leads to development of adenomyosis, mice that expressed a dominant
stabilized ß-catenin in the uterus were used by crossing PR-Cre mice with
Ctnnb1(f(ex3)/+) mice. Uteri of PR(cre) (/+) Ctnnb1(f(ex3)/+) mice displayed an
abnormal irregular structure and highly active proliferation in the myometrium,
and subsequently developed adenomyosis. Interestingly, the expression of
E-cadherin was repressed in epithelial cells of PR(cre) (/+) Ctnnb1(f(ex3)/+)
mice compared to control mice. Repression of E-cadherin is one of the hallmarks
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The expression of SNAIL and ZEB1 was 
observed in some epithelial cells of the uterus in PR(cre) (/+) Ctnnb1(f(ex3)/+) 
mice but not in control mice. Vimentin and COUP-TFII, mesenchymal cell markers,
were expressed in some epithelial cells of PR(cre) (/+) Ctnnb1(f(ex3)/+) mice. In
human adenomyosis, the expression of E-cadherin was decreased in epithelial cells
compared to control endometrium, while CD10, an endometrial stromal marker, was
expressed in some epithelial cells of human adenomyosis. These results suggest
that abnormal activation of ß-catenin contributes to adenomyosis development
through the induction of EMT.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4105844
PMID: 23784889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;73(12):3649-60. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3832.

Targeting ROR1 inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis.

Cui B(1), Zhang S, Chen L, Yu J, Widhopf GF 2nd, Fecteau JF, Rassenti LZ, Kipps
TJ.

Author information: 
(1)UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Metastasis is responsible for 90% of cancer-related deaths. Strategies are needed
that can inhibit the capacity of cancer cells to migrate across the anatomic
barriers and colonize distant organs. Here, we show an association between
metastasis and expression of a type I receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan
receptor, ROR1, which is expressed during embryogenesis and by various cancers,
but not by normal postpartum tissues. We found that expression of ROR1 associates
with the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which occurs during
embryogenesis and cancer metastasis. Breast adenocarcinomas expressing high
levels of ROR1 were more likely to have gene expression signatures associated
with EMT and had higher rates of relapse and metastasis than breast
adenocarcinomas expressing low levels of ROR1. Suppressing expression of ROR1 in 
metastasis-prone breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231, HS-578T, or BT549,
attenuated expression of proteins associated with EMT (e.g., vimentin, SNAIL-1/2,
and ZEB1), enhanced expression of E-cadherin, epithelial cytokeratins (e.g.,
CK-19), and tight junction proteins (e.g., ZO-1), and impaired their
migration/invasion capacity in vitro and the metastatic potential of MDA-MB-231
cells in immunodeficient mice. Conversely, transfection of MCF-7 cells to express
ROR1 reduced expression of E-cadherin and CK-19, but enhanced the expression of
SNAIL-1/2 and vimentin. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 with a monoclonal antibody
specific for ROR1 induced downmodulation of vimentin and inhibited cancer cell
migration and invasion in vitro and tumor metastasis in vivo. Collectively, this 
study indicates that ROR1 may regulate EMT and metastasis and that antibodies
targeting ROR1 can inhibit cancer progression and metastasis.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3832210
PMID: 23771907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Transplant Proc. 2013 Jun;45(5):1797-801. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.11.024.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition in murine tracheal allotransplantation: an
immunohistochemical observation.

Konoeda C(1), Koinuma D, Morishita Y, Sano A, Nagayama K, Motomura N, Kakimi K,
Miyazono K, Nakajima J, Nicolls MR, Murakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant epithelial repair is a crucial event in the airway
remodeling that characterizes obliterative bronchiolitis (OB) in transplanted
lungs. Recent data from experiments using epithelial cell lines and human airway 
tissues from lung transplant recipients suggest that epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) plays an important role in OB. The aim of this study was to
clarify whether EMT is involved in airway remodeling in an animal model.
METHODS: We performed orthotopic tracheal transplantation from BALB/c to C57BL/6 
mice with from BALC/c to BALB/c mouse grafts as controls. Five allogeneic and 3
syngeneic recipients were humanely killed at predetermined postoperative days
2-12 as well as 14 and 21. Histology was evaluated using hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) 
staining. We studied the expression of specific markers, including E-cadherin, an
epithelial marker; a-smooth muscle actin (SMA), and S100A4, mesenchymal markers, 
and zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), an EMT-related transcription
factor.
RESULTS: Histologic assessment of serial H&E stains of allogeneic grafts showed
remarkable pseudostratified respiratory epithelium with subepithelial
inflammatory cell infiltration, as well as denuded and flattened epithelium and
subepithelial fibrosis. The dynamic epithelial changes occurred earlier than the 
subepithelial fibrosis. Immunohistochemical evaluation indicated the emergence of
a-SMA- positive epithelial cells that were most prominent on day 7. The
expression of E-cadherin was attenuated in a-SMA-positive epithelial cells.
S100A4 was also expressed in epithelial cells. A few days before the
intraepithelial expression of a-SMA, ZEB1 emerged in the nuclei of epithelial
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed expression of an EMT-related transcription factor and
mesenchymal markers along with the attenuation of epithelial marker expression in
epithelial cells, several days before prominent subepithelial fibrosis formation,
results that suggest epithelial cells to play an important fibrosis role in
airway remodeling during epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4011642
PMID: 23769046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Stem Cells. 2013 Sep;31(9):1749-62. doi: 10.1002/stem.1448.

MicroRNA-200C and -150 play an important role in endothelial cell differentiation
and vasculogenesis by targeting transcription repressor ZEB1.

Luo Z(1), Wen G, Wang G, Pu X, Ye S, Xu Q, Wang W, Xiao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London,
London, United Kingdom; Institute of Bioengineering, Queen Mary University of
London, London, United Kingdom.

To investigate the role of miRNA in controlling human embryonic stem (hES) cell
differentiation toward the endothelial lineage and chick embryonic blood vessel
formation, undifferentiated hES cells were first cultured on Matrigel-coated
flasks and in endothelial cell growth medium-2 (EGM-2) to initiate endothelial
cell (EC) differentiation. CD146(+) cells were isolated from differentiating hES 
cells and expanded in vitro. The in vitro expanded CD146(+) cells were positive
for EC markers, capable of Ac-LDL uptake, lectin binding, and the formation of
vascular structures in vitro and in vivo. miRNA gain/loss-of-function analyses
revealed that miR-150 and miR-200c were crucial in EC differentiation.
Transcriptional repressor zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) was
identified as the communal target gene of miRNA-200C and -150, and inhibition of 
ZEB1 was required for miRNA-200C or -150 mediated EC gene expressions. Moreover, 
we demonstrated that ZEB1 could transcriptionally repress EC gene expression
through direct binding to promoters of EC genes. Finally, we also demonstrated
that miRNA-200c and -150 played an important role in chick embryonic blood vessel
formation by in vivo inhibition of miRNA-200C or -150 in developing chick
embryos, and blocking ZEB1 signaling in CD146-positive cells could rescue the
inhibitory effects of miR-200c inhibiton in in vivo vasculogenesis. Our findings 
revealed that miR-150 and miR-200c play an important role in human endothelial
lineage specification and chick embryonic vasculogenesis by targeting ZEB1.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23765923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Science. 2013 Jul 5;341(6141):71-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1237999. Epub 2013 Jun
13.

miR-200b and miR-429 function in mouse ovulation and are essential for female
fertility.

Hasuwa H(1), Ueda J, Ikawa M, Okabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka,
Japan.

Ovulation in the mouse and other mammals is controlled by hormones secreted by
the hypothalamo-pituitary-ovarian axis. We describe anovulation and infertility
in female mice lacking the microRNAs miR-200b and miR-429. Both miRNAs are
strongly expressed in the pituitary gland, where they suppress expression of the 
transcriptional repressor ZEB1. Eliminating these miRNAs, in turn, inhibits
luteinizing hormone (LH) synthesis by repressing transcription of its ß-subunit
gene, which leads to lowered serum LH concentration, an impaired LH surge, and
failure to ovulate. Our results reveal roles for miR-200b and miR-429, and their 
target the Zeb1 gene, in the regulation of mammalian reproduction. Thus, the
hypothalamo-pituitary-ovarian axis was shown to require miR-200b and miR-429 to
support ovulation.

PMID: 23765281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 1;12(13):2100-12. doi: 10.4161/cc.25142. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

KDM5B histone demethylase controls epithelial-mesenchymal transition of cancer
cells by regulating the expression of the microRNA-200 family.

Enkhbaatar Z(1), Terashima M, Oktyabri D, Tange S, Ishimura A, Yano S, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa
University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Histone methylation is implicated in various biological and pathological
processes including cancer development. In this study, we discovered that ectopic
expression of KDM5B, a histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) demethylase, promoted
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cancer cells. KDM5B increased the
expression of transcription factors, ZEB1 and ZEB2, followed by downregulation of
E-cadherin and upregulation of mesenchymal marker genes. The expression of the
microRNA-200 (miR-200) family, which specifically targets ZEB1 and ZEB2, was
reduced in the cells with KDM5B overexpression. We found that KDM5B repressed the
expression of the miR-200 family by changing histone H3 methylation status of
their regulatory regions. The introduction of miR-200 precursor in the cells
inhibited EMT induction by KDM5B, suggesting that miR-200 family was a critical
downstream mediator of KDM5B-promoted EMT. Furthermore, knockdown of KDM5B was
shown to affect the expression of EMT-related genes, indicating the involvement
of endogenous KDM5B. Our study demonstrated a novel role of KDM5B histone lysine 
demethylase in EMT, which may contribute to malignant progression of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3737312
PMID: 23759590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncol Rep. 2013 Aug;30(2):643-50. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2530. Epub 2013 Jun 7.

microRNA-200c modulates the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human renal
cell carcinoma metastasis.

Wang X(1), Chen X, Wang R, Xiao P, Xu Z, Chen L, Hang W, Ruan A, Yang H, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, PR China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) play essential roles in several physiological and pathological
processes, including tumor metastasis. Metastasis is associated with poor
prognosis in renal carcinoma patients and almost 20-30% of patients present with 
distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis. The aim of the present study was to 
investigate the possible roles of miR-200c in regulating metastasis and to
identify its target genes in renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Among the miRNAs
downregulated in our tissue specimen microarray, miR-200c was downregulated
significantly. Functional assays demonstrated that restoration of miR-200c
significantly inhibited the migration and invasion of SN12-PM6 and 786-0 cells
in vitro. Genome-wide gene expression analysis and TargetScan database studies
showed that ZEB1, which has been shown to promote tumor invasion and migration
through E-cadherin gene silencing, is a promising candidate target gene of
miR-200c. Overexpression of miR-200c in SN12-PM6 and 786-0 cells was concurrent
with downregulation of ZEB1 and upregulation of E-cadherin mRNA and protein. In
addition, miR-200c affected the protein expression of p-Akt and Akt. Thus, our
study demonstrated that miR-200c decreases the metastatic ability of renal
carcinoma cells by upregulating E-cadherin through ZEB1 and that modulating the
expression of miR-200c could influence Akt protein levels. We therefore concluded
that there is an Akt-miR-200c-E-cadherin axis in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition process in RCC.

PMID: 23754305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 4;8(6):e65127. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065127. Print 2013.

Epithelial cell differentiation regulated by MicroRNA-200a in mammary glands.

Nagaoka K(1), Zhang H, Watanabe G, Taya K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Physiology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan. nagaokak@cc.tuat.ac.jp

Mammary gland epithelial cells undergo periodic cycles of proliferation,
differentiation, and involution. Many studies have reported that miRNAs, which
are small, non-coding RNAs, influence a variety of biological processes during
posttranscriptional regulation. Here, we found that one miRNA, miR-200a, was
relatively highly expressed in epithelial cell-rich organs such as mammary
glands, lung, and kidney in mice. In mammary glands, miR-200a expression
increased during mid-pregnancy through lactation; its expression was stimulated
by lactogenic hormone treatment of mammary epithelial cells. Lactogenic hormone
also induced the expression of milk protein ß-casein mRNA (a marker of cell
differentiation) and E-cadherin mRNA (a marker of epithelial cells). However,
knockdown of miR-200a prevented increases in ß-casein and E-cadherin mRNA
expression. Protein analysis revealed that E-cadherin signal was decreased and
ZEB1 (a marker of EMT) was increased following miR-200a knockdown. Finally, in a 
three-dimensional culture system modeling lumen-containing mammary ducts,
miR-200a knockdown decreased the cavity formation rate and suppressed claudin-3
and par-6b expression, indicating reduced epithelial cell polarity. These
observations suggest that miR-200a is important for maintaining the epithelial
cell phenotype, which contributes to lactogenic hormone induction of cellular
differentiation in mammary glands.

PMCID: PMC3672172
PMID: 23750238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mod Pathol. 2013 Nov;26(11):1514-24. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.93. Epub 2013
Jun 7.

ZEB1 overexpression associated with E-cadherin and microRNA-200 downregulation is
characteristic of undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma.

Romero-Pérez L(1), López-García MÁ, Díaz-Martín J, Biscuola M, Castilla MÁ, Tafe 
LJ, Garg K, Oliva E, Matias-Guiu X, Soslow RA, Palacios J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital 
Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.

Undifferentiated endometrial carcinomas are very aggressive high-grade
endometrial carcinomas that are frequently under-recognized. This study aimed to 
analyze the molecular alterations underlying the development of these endometrial
carcinomas, focusing on those related to dedifferentiation. We assessed a series 
of 120 tumors: 57 grade 1 and 2 endometrioid endometrial carcinomas, 15 grade 3
endometrioid endometrial carcinomas, 27 endometrial serous carcinomas, and 21
undifferentiated endometrial carcinomas. We found a high frequency of DNA
mismatch repair deficiency (38%) and moderate rate of p53 overexpression (~33%)
in undifferentiated carcinomas. In contrast to the characteristic endometrioid
phenotype, there was a dramatic downregulation of E-cadherin expression in the
undifferentiated subtype. Quantitative methylation studies dismissed CDH1
promoter hypermethylation as the mechanism responsible for this change in gene
expression, while immunohistochemistry revealed that the E-cadherin repressor
ZEB1 was frequently overexpressed (62%) in undifferentiated endometrial
carcinomas. This finding was accompanied by a sharp downregulation in the
expression of the miR-200 family of microRNAs, well-known targets of ZEB1.
Furthermore, there was enhanced expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition markers in undifferentiated endometrial carcinomas, such as
N-cadherin, cytoplasmic p120, and osteonectin. In addition, HMGA2, a regulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition that is expressed in aggressive endometrial 
tumors, such as endometrial serous carcinomas and carcinosarcomas, was expressed 
in >20% of undifferentiated carcinomas. These results suggest that ZEB1
overexpression, associated with E-cadherin and miR-200s downregulation, and the
expression of mesenchymal markers might enhance the metastatic potential of
undifferentiated endometrial carcinomas, leading to a poor prognosis. In
addition, our observations suggest that the immnohistochemical analysis of
E-cadherin and ZEB1 can aid in the differential diagnosis of the more agressive
undifferentiated endometrial carcinomas from grade 3 endometrioid carcinomas.

PMID: 23743934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2013 May 14;8(5):e62757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062757. Print 2013.

miR-655 Is an EMT-suppressive microRNA targeting ZEB1 and TGFBR2.

Harazono Y(1), Muramatsu T, Endo H, Uzawa N, Kawano T, Harada K, Inazawa J,
Kozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

Recently, the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been demonstrated to
contribute to normal and disease processes including cancer progression. To
explore EMT-suppressive microRNAs (miRNAs), we established a cell-based reporter 
system using a stable clone derived from a pancreatic cancer cell line, Panc1,
transfected with a reporter construct containing a promoter sequence of
CDH1/E-cadherin in the 5' upstream region of the ZsGreen1 reporter gene. Then, we
performed function-based screening with 470 synthetic double-stranded RNAs
(dsRNAs) mimicking human mature miRNAs using the system and identified miR-655 as
a novel EMT-suppressive miRNA. Overexpression of miR-655 not only induced the
upregulation of E-cadherin and downregulation of typical EMT-inducers but also
suppressed migration and invasion of mesenchymal-like cancer cells accompanied by
a morphological shift toward the epithelial phenotype. In addition, we found a
significant correlation between miR-655 expression and a better prognosis in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Moreover, ZEB1 and TGFBR2, which are
essential components of the TGF-b signaling pathway, were identified as direct
targets of miR-655, suggesting that the activation of the TGF-b-ZEB1-E-cadherin
axis by aberrant downregulation of miR-655 may accelerate cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3653886
PMID: 23690952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Jul;9(7):391-401. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.96. Epub 2013
May 14.

MicroRNAs--mediators of myometrial contractility during pregnancy and labour.

Renthal NE(1), Williams KC, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Medical Center Dallas, 1935 Medical
District Drive, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

The maintenance of myometrial quiescence and initiation of contractility, which
lead to parturition at term and preterm, involve a shifting equilibrium between
anti-inflammatory and proinflammatory signalling pathways. Progesterone (P4),
acting through the progesterone receptor (PR), has an essential and multifaceted 
role in the maintenance of myometrial quiescence. This effect of P4-PR signalling
is mediated, in part, by its anti-inflammatory actions and capacity to repress
the expression of genes that encode proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1 and
IL-6, and contraction-associated proteins, such as OXTR, GJA1 and PTGS2. By
contrast, increased expression of genes that ultimately lead to parturition is
mediated by enhanced inflammatory and estradiol-17ß (E2) and estrogen receptor a 
signalling, which reduce PR function, thus further intensifying the inflammatory 
response. To obtain a more complete understanding of the molecular events that
underlie the transition of the pregnant myometrium from a refractory to a
contractile state, the roles of microRNAs, their targets, and their
transcriptional and hormonal regulation have been investigated. This article
reviews the actions of the miR-200 family and their P4-regulated targets-the
transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2 and STAT5B-in the pregnant myometrium, as well
as the role of miR-199a-3p and miR-214 and their mutual target PTGS2. The central
role of ZEB1 as the mediator of the opposing actions of P4 and E2 on myometrial
contractility will be highlighted.

PMID: 23669656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 28;288(26):18643-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.467787. Epub
2013 May 10.

Zeb1 regulates E-cadherin and Epcam (epithelial cell adhesion molecule)
expression to control cell behavior in early zebrafish development.

Vannier C(1), Mock K, Brabletz T, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute Biology I, Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Hauptstrasse 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The ZEB1 transcription factor is best known as an inducer of
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) in cancer metastasis, acting through
transcriptional repression of CDH1 (encoding E-cadherin) and the EMT-suppressing 
microRNA-200s (miR-200s). Here we analyze roles of the ZEB1 zebrafish orthologs, 
Zeb1a and Zeb1b, and of miR-200s in control of cell adhesion and morphogenesis
during gastrulation and segmentation stages. Loss and gain of function analyses
revealed that Zeb1 represses cdh1 expression to fine-tune adhesiveness of
migrating deep blastodermal cells. Furthermore, Zeb1 acts as a repressor of epcam
in the deep cells of the blastoderm and may contribute to control of epithelial
integrity of enveloping layer cells, the outermost cells of the blastoderm. We
found a similar ZEB1-dependent repression of EPCAM expression in human pancreatic
and breast cancer cell lines, mediated through direct binding of ZEB1 to the
EPCAM promoter. Thus, Zeb1 proteins employ several evolutionary conserved
mechanisms to regulate cell-cell adhesion during development and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3696638
PMID: 23667256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Clin Genet. 2013 Aug;84(2):109-19. doi: 10.1111/cge.12191. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Genetics of the corneal endothelial dystrophies: an evidence-based review.

Aldave AJ(1), Han J, Frausto RF.

Author information: 
(1)The Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 900957003, USA. aldave@jsei.ucla.edu

The aim of this review was to provide an evidenced-based review of the genetic
basis of the corneal endothelial dystrophies. A review of the English language
peer-reviewed literature describing the molecular genetic basis of posterior
polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD), congenital hereditary endothelial
dystrophy (CHED), Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) and X-linked
endothelial corneal dystrophy (XECD) was performed. Mutations in several genes
have been implicated as playing a pathogenic role in the corneal endothelial
dystrophies: VSX1 mutations in PPCD1; COL8A2 mutations in PPCD2 and FECD; ZEB1
mutations in PPCD3 and FECD; and SLC4A11 mutations in CHED2 and FECD. However,
linkage, association and familial segregation analyses support a role of only one
gene in each corneal endothelial dystrophy: ZEB1 in PPCD3, SLC4A11 in CHED2 and
COL8A2 in FECD (early onset). In addition, insufficient evidence exists to
consider the autosomal dominant form of CHED (CHED1) as distinct from PPCD. An
accurate classification of the corneal endothelial dystrophies requires a
critical review of the evidence to support the role of each suggested chromosomal
locus, gene and genetic mutation associated with a corneal endothelial dystrophy.
Only after the separation of evidence from opinion is performed can a critical
examination of the molecular pathways that lead to endothelial dysfunction in
each of these disorders be accurately performed.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3885339
PMID: 23662738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2013 May 2;8(5):e63466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063466. Print 2013.

Constitutively active androgen receptor variants upregulate expression of
mesenchymal markers in prostate cancer cells.

Cottard F(1), Asmane I, Erdmann E, Bergerat JP, Kurtz JE, Céraline J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1113, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS),
Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

Androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway remains the foremost target of novel
therapeutics for castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, the
expression of constitutively active AR variants lacking the carboxy-terminal
region in CRPC may lead to therapy inefficacy. These AR variants are supposed to 
support PCa cell growth in an androgen-depleted environment, but their mode of
action still remains unresolved. Moreover, recent studies indicate that
constitutively active AR variants are expressed in primary prostate tumors and
may contribute to tumor progression. The aim of this study was to investigate the
impact of constitutively active AR variants on the expression of tumor
progression markers. N-cadherin expression was analyzed in LNCaP cells
overexpressing the wild type AR or a constitutively active AR variant by qRT-PCR,
Western blot and immunofluorescence. We showed here for the first time that
N-cadherin expression was increased in the presence of constitutively active AR
variants. These results were confirmed in C4-2B cells overexpressing these AR
variants. Although N-cadherin expression is often associated with a
downregulation of E-cadherin, this phenomenon was not observed in our model.
Nevertheless, in addition to the increased expression of N-cadherin, an
upregulation of other mesenchymal markers expression such as VIMENTIN, SNAIL and 
ZEB1 was observed in the presence of constitutively active variants. In
conclusion, our findings highlight novel consequences of constitutively active AR
variants on the regulation of mesenchymal markers in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3642121
PMID: 23658830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2013 May 1;8(5):e62547. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062547. Print 2013.

p63 attenuates epithelial to mesenchymal potential in an experimental prostate
cell model.

Olsen JR(1), Oyan AM, Rostad K, Hellem MR, Liu J, Li L, Micklem DR, Haugen H,
Lorens JB, Rotter V, Ke XS, Lin B, Kalland KH.

Author information: 
(1)The Gade Institute, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

The transcription factor p63 is central for epithelial homeostasis and
development. In our model of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human 
prostate cells, p63 was one of the most down-regulated transcription factors
during EMT. We therefore investigated the role of p63 in EMT. Over-expression of 
the predominant epithelial isoform <U+0394>Np63a in mesenchymal type cells of the model 
led to gain of several epithelial characteristics without resulting in a complete
mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET). This was corroborated by a reciprocal
effect when p63 was knocked down in epithelial EP156T cells. Global gene
expression analyses showed that <U+0394>Np63a induced gene modules involved in both
cell-to-cell and cell-to-extracellular-matrix junctions in mesenchymal type
cells. Genome-wide analysis of p63 binding sites using ChIP-seq analyses
confirmed binding of p63 to regulatory areas of genes associated with cell
adhesion in prostate epithelial cells. DH1 and ZEB1 are two elemental factors in 
the control of EMT. Over-expression and knock-down of these factors,
respectively, were not sufficient alone or in combination with <U+0394>Np63a to reverse 
completely the mesenchymal phenotype. The partial reversion of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition might reflect the ability of <U+0394>Np63a, as a key co-ordinator
of several epithelial gene expression modules, to reduce epithelial to
mesenchymal plasticity (EMP). The utility of <U+0394>Np63a expression and the potential 
of reduced EMP in order to counteract metastasis warrant further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3641034
PMID: 23658742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jun 7;435(3):339-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.060. Epub 2013 Apr 27.

A novel function of HPV16-E6/E7 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Jung YS(1), Kato I, Kim HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 is among the most important etiological factors in 
many human cancers, including head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) not
associated with alcohol or tobacco use. HPV16-E6 and E7 oncoproteins target
intracellular signaling networks, altering key molecular and cellular events
during tumor progression. The present study investigates the role of HPV16-E6 and
E7 oncogenes on the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a cellular process
thought to be critical for tumor cell invasion and metastasis. Using the
epithelial MDCK cell line as an in vitro model, we show that the stable
expression of HPV16-E6 or E7 induces morphological conversion from
cobblestone-shaped epithelium to spindle-shaped mesenchyme-like phenotype.
Consistent with these morphological changes, both E6 and E7 induce expression of 
the EMT-activating transcriptional factors Slug, Twist, ZEB1 and ZEB2, especially
ZEBs, accompanied with switch from epithelial to mesenchymal markers.
Importantly, E6 and E7 expression results in induction of the migratory and
invasive potential, a functional hallmark of EMT. When we examined the
association between HPV16 and the EMT signature in HNSCC cell lines derived from 
head and neck cancer patients, we found a correlation between HPV16 positivity
and the expression of EMT transcription factor ZEB1. Taken together, our findings
suggest HPV16 induces EMT-like processes via induction of the EMT transcription
factors which may contribute to tumor progression and metastasis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23628416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e62334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062334. Print 2013.

Reduced expression of miR-200 family members contributes to antiestrogen
resistance in LY2 human breast cancer cells.

Manavalan TT(1), Teng Y, Litchfield LM, Muluhngwi P, Al-Rayyan N, Klinge CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville,
Kentucky, United States of America.

INTRODUCTION: The role of miRNAs in acquired endocrine-resistant breast cancer is
not fully understood. One hallmark of tumor progression is
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), characterized by a loss of cell
adhesion resulting from reduced E-cadherin and increased cell mobility. miR-200
family members regulate EMT by suppressing expression of transcriptional
repressors ZEB1/2. Previously we reported that the expression of miR-200a,
miR-200b, and miR-200c was lower in LY2 endocrine-resistant, mesenchymal breast
cancer cells compared to parental, endocrine sensitive, epithelial MCF-7 breast
cancer cells. Here we investigated the regulation of miR-200 family members and
their role in endocrine-sensitivity in breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: miR-200 family expression was progressively reduced in a breast cancer
cell line model of advancing endocrine/tamoxifen (TAM) resistance. Concomitant
with miR-200 decrease, there was an increase in ZEB1 mRNA expression.
Overexpression of miR-200b or miR-200c in LY2 cells altered cell morphology to a 
more epithelial appearance and inhibited cell migration. Further, miR-200b and
miR-200c overexpression sensitized LY2 cells to growth inhibition by estrogen
receptor (ER) antagonists TAM and fulvestrant. Knockdown of ZEB1 in LY2 cells
recapitulated the effect of miR-200b and miR-200c overexpression resulting in
inhibition of LY2 cell proliferation by TAM and fulvestrant, but not the
aromatase inhibitor exemestane. Demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC) in combination with histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA)
increased miR-200b and miR-200c in LY2 cells. Concomitant with the increase in
miR-200b and miR-200c, ZEB1 expression was decreased and cells appeared more
epithelial in morphology and were sensitized to TAM and fulvestrant inhibition.
Likewise, knockdown of ZEB1 increased antiestrogen sensitivity of LY2 cells
resulting in inhibition of cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that reduced miRNA-200b and miR-200c expression
contributes to endocrine resistance in breast cancer cells and that the reduced
expression of these miR-200 family members in endocrine-resistant cells can be
reversed by 5-aza-dC+TSA.

PMCID: PMC3633860
PMID: 23626803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 May 3;54(5):3215-23. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-11781.

Mutational spectrum of the ZEB1 gene in corneal dystrophies supports a
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Lechner J(1), Dash DP, Muszynska D, Hosseini M, Segev F, George S, Frazer DG,
Moore JE, Kaye SB, Young T, Simpson DA, Churchill AJ, Héon E, Willoughby CE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vision and Vascular Science, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast,
Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Mutations in ZEB1 have been reported in posterior polymorphous corneal
dystrophy (PPCD3; MIM #609141) and Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD6;
MIM #613270). Although PPCD and keratoconus are clinically and pathologically
distinct, PPCD has been associated with keratoconus, suggesting a common genetic 
basis. The purpose of our study was to perform mutational screening of the ZEB1
gene in patients affected with keratoconus or PPCD.
METHODS: Sanger sequencing of ZEB1 was performed in 70 unrelated patients with
keratoconus and 18 unrelated patients with PPCD. Real-time quantitative PCR
(RT-qPCR) was performed on RNA from cultured corneal keratocytes obtained from a 
keratoconic patient harboring a missense ZEB1 mutation (p.Gln640His) undergoing
corneal transplantation.
RESULTS: Mutational analysis of ZEB1 in PPCD identified a previously reported
frameshift mutation (C.1578_1579INSG) and a novel nonsense mutation (C.2249C A)
in exon 7 of ZEB1 causing the insertion of a stop codon: p.Ser750X. In the
keratoconus cohort, a novel heterozygous pathogenic mutation in exon 7 (c.1920G >
T; p.Gln640His) of ZEB1 was identified in a family affected with keratoconus and 
Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy. RT-qPCR performed on cultured corneal
keratocytes harboring the missense ZEB1 mutation (p.Gln640His) demonstrated that 
COL4A1 and COL4A2 were markedly downregulated, and COL4A3, COL4A4, and COL8A2
were moderately downregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data combined with the previously reported mutational spectrum
of ZEB1 support a genotypephenotype correlation: missense substitutions in the
ZEB1 protein are associated with FECD6 and keratoconus, whereas protein
truncating ZEB1 mutations result in PPCD3. The dysregulation of a-type IV
collagens represents a common link between ZEB1 mutation and the clinical
phenotypes (PPCD3, FECD, and keratoconus).

PMID: 23599324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jun 15;126(Pt 12):2740-6. doi: 10.1242/jcs.126367. Epub 2013 Apr
16.

Loss of Git2 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition by
miR146a-Cnot6L-controlled expression of Zeb1.

Zhou W(1), Thiery JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A STAR, Singapore 138673.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) can be induced by several pleiotropically
activated transcription factors, including the zinc-finger E-box-binding protein 
Zeb1. Mechanisms regulating Zeb1 expression have been partly uncovered, showing a
critical role for the miR-200 family members. In the present study, we show that 
Zeb1 is regulated by the Arf GTPase-activating protein (GAP) Git2. Following the 
loss of Git2, we found that miR-146a maturation is enhanced, which in turn
promotes the expression of Zeb1 and induction of EMT. Furthermore, we found that 
Cnot6L, a validated target of miR-146a, affects the stability of Zeb1 mRNA
through its deadenylase activity. Our results present evidence for a new role for
loss of Git2 in promoting EMT through a novel regulatory pathway.

PMID: 23591815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jun;29(6):2311-7. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2401. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Anoxia/reoxygenation induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human colon
cancer cell lines.

Okajima M(1), Kokura S, Ishikawa T, Mizushima K, Tsuchiya R, Matsuyama T, Adachi 
S, Okayama T, Sakamoto N, Kamada K, Katada K, Uchiyama K, Handa O, Takagi T, Yagi
N, Naito Y, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered to be a crucial event in
the development of cancer metastasis. Anoxia/reoxygenation (A/R) is known to
occur in cancer tissues due to angiogenesis and changes in tissue pressure that
occur during tumor growth. We investigated whether A/R induces EMT in the human
colon cancer cell line HT-29. Colon cancer cells were exposed to anoxia (2 h)
followed by reoxygenation (4-22 h) and evaluated for EMT changes using
immunofluorescence and western blot analyses. We also investigated the expression
of EMT-related transcription factors (Snail and ZEB1) using RT-PCR and evaluated 
the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B using ELISA. To determine whether NF-<U+03BA>B is involved in
A/R-induced EMT, HT-29 cells were treated with proteasome inhibitors. Colon
cancer cells exposed to A/R underwent EMT morphological changes; the cancer cells
acquired a spindle-shaped phenotype. The expression of E-cadherin on the cell
surface and the total amount of E-cadherin proteins were reduced after A/R. The
expression of EMT-related transcription factors (Snail, ZEB1) was increased after
A/R. Pretreatment with proteasome inhibitors significantly attenuated the
downregulation of E-cadherin induced by A/R. These results indicate that A/R
induces EMT in human colon cancer cells through an NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
transcriptional pathway.

PMID: 23589103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Jun;31(6):1375-80. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1348. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

Upregulation of microRNA-155 promotes the migration and invasion of colorectal
cancer cells through the regulation of claudin-1 expression.

Zhang GJ(1), Xiao HX, Tian HP, Liu ZL, Xia SS, Zhou T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of General Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan 
Medical College, Nanchong, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.

Human microRNA-155 (miR-155) has been demonstrated to regulate a variety of
cellular functions, including epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by
targeting multiple messenger RNAs (mRNAs). However, its role in colorectal cancer
(CRC) remains unelucidated. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to
investigate the effects of miR-155 on CRC cells. The expression level of miR-155 
was quantified by quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR (qRT-PCR) in
primary CRC tissues and normal adjacent mucosa. MTT, migration and invasion
assays were used to examine the proliferation, migration and invasion of SW480
cells transfected with miR-155. The expression of miR-155 was significantly
upregulated in the CRC tissues and the high expression of miR-155 correlated with
an advanced clinical stage, lymph node and distant metastases. The ectopic
expression of miR-155 enhanced the migration and invasive ability of the SW480
cells and altered their morphological appearance; however, cell proliferation was
not affected. E-cadherin expression levels decreased, while ZEB1 expression
levels increased in the SW480 cells overexpressing miR-155. Furthermore, the
overexpression of miR-155 upregulated claudin-1 expression. Thus, our data
suggest that miR-155 plays an important role in promoting CRC cell migration and 
invasion, at least in part through the regulation of claudin-1 expression and
controlling metastasis in CRC.

PMID: 23588589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Expert Rev Ophthalmol. 2012 Aug;7(4):363-375.

The genetics of Fuchs' corneal dystrophy.

Iliff BW(1), Riazuddin SA, Gottsch JD.

Author information: 
(1)The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Fuchs' corneal dystrophy (FCD) is a common late-onset genetic disorder of the
corneal endothelium. It causes loss of endothelial cell density and excrescences 
in the Descemet membrane, eventually progressing to corneal edema, necessitating 
corneal transplantation. The genetic basis of FCD is complex and heterogeneous,
demonstrating variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance. To date, three
causal genes, ZEB1, SLC4A11 and LOXHD1, have been identified, representing a
small proportion of the total genetic load of FCD. An additional four loci have
been localized, including a region on chromosome 18 that is potentially
responsible for a large proportion of all FCD cases. The elucidation of the
causal genes underlying these loci will begin to clarify the pathogenesis of FCD 
and pave the way for the emergence of nonsurgical treatments.

PMCID: PMC3622272
PMID: 23585771  [PubMed]


77. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 27;33(13):1680-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.114. Epub 2013 Apr 15.

MUC1-C oncoprotein activates the ZEB1/miR-200c regulatory loop and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Rajabi H(1), Alam M(1), Takahashi H(1), Kharbanda A(1), Guha M(1), Ahmad R(1),
Kufe D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is activated in cancer cells by ZEB1,
a member of the zinc finger/homeodomain family of transcriptional repressors. The
mucin 1 (MUC1) heterodimeric protein is aberrantly overexpressed in human
carcinoma cells. The present studies in breast cancer cells demonstrate that the 
oncogenic MUC1-C subunit induces expression of ZEB1 by a NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor
kappa B) p65-dependent mechanism. MUC1-C occupies the ZEB1 promoter with NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 and thereby promotes ZEB1 transcription. In turn, ZEB1 associates with MUC1-C
and the ZEB1/MUC1-C complex contributes to the transcriptional suppression of
miR-200c, an inducer of epithelial differentiation. The co-ordinate upregulation 
of ZEB1 and suppression of miR-200c has been linked to the induction of EMT. In
concert with the effects of MUC1-C on ZEB1 and miR-200c, we show that MUC1-C
induces EMT and cellular invasion by a ZEB1-mediated mechanism. These findings
indicate that (i) MUC1-C activates ZEB1 and suppresses miR-200c with the
induction of EMT and (ii) targeting MUC1-C could be an effective approach for the
treatment of breast and possibly other types of cancers that develop EMT
properties.

PMCID: PMC3783575
PMID: 23584475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 1;73(11):3381-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4047. Epub
2013 Apr 10.

Hedgehog signaling alters reliance on EGF receptor signaling and mediates
anti-EGFR therapeutic resistance in head and neck cancer.

Keysar SB(1), Le PN, Anderson RT, Morton JJ, Bowles DW, Paylor JJ, Vogler BW,
Thorburn J, Fernandez P, Glogowska MJ, Takimoto SM, Sehrt DB, Gan GN,
Eagles-Soukup JR, Serracino H, Hirsch FR, Lucia MS, Thorburn A, Song JI, Wang XJ,
Jimeno A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Departments of
Pharmacology, Pathology, Radiation Oncology, and Otolaryngology, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The EGF receptor (EGFR)-directed monoclonal antibody cetuximab is the only
targeted therapy approved for the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck (HNSCC) but is only effective in a minority of patients.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been implicated as a drug
resistance mechanism in multiple cancers, and the EGFR and Hedgehog pathways
(HhP) are relevant to this process, but the interplay between the two pathways
has not been defined in HNSCC. Here, we show that HNSCC cells that were naturally
sensitive to EGFR inhibition over time developed increased expression of the HhP 
transcription factor GLI1 as they became resistant after long-term EGFR inhibitor
exposure. This robustly correlated with an increase in vimentin expression.
Conversely, the HhP negatively regulated an EGFR-dependent, EMT-like state in
HNSCC cells, and pharmacologic or genetic inhibition of HhP signaling pushed
cells further into an EGFR-dependent phenotype, increasing expression of ZEB1 and
VIM. In vivo treatment with cetuximab resulted in tumor shrinkage in four of six 
HNSCC patient-derived xenografts; however, they eventually regrew. Cetuximab in
combination with the HhP inhibitor IPI-926 eliminated tumors in two cases and
significantly delayed regrowth in the other two cases. Expression of EMT genes
TWIST and ZEB2 was increased in sensitive xenografts, suggesting a possible
resistant mesenchymal population. In summary, we report that EGFR-dependent HNSCC
cells can undergo both EGFR-dependent and -independent EMT and HhP signaling is a
regulator in both processes. Cetuximab plus IPI-926 forces tumor cells into an
EGFR-dependent state, delaying or completely blocking tumor recurrence.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3674118
PMID: 23576557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogenesis. 2013 Apr 8;2:e42. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.5.

NVP-LDE-225 (Erismodegib) inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and human
prostate cancer stem cell growth in NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice by regulating Bmi-1 
and microRNA-128.

Nanta R(1), Kumar D, Meeker D, Rodova M, Van Veldhuizen PJ, Shankar S, Srivastava
RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS, USA.

Prostate cancer stem cells (CSCs) are defined by their extensive self-renewal,
differentiation and tumor initiation properties. It is now clear that CSCs are
involved in tumor growth and recurrence, and resistance to conventional
treatments. The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway has a crucial role in stemness and
tumorigenesis. Thus, the strategy that suppresses stemness and consequently
tumorigenic potential of CSCs could be considered for the management of prostate 
cancer. The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms, by
which NVP-LDE-225/Erismodegib (smoothened inhibitor) regulates stem cell
characteristics and tumor growth in prostate cancer. The effects of NVP-LDE-225
on CSC's viability, sphere formation, apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and tumor growth in NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice were examined.
NVP-LDE-225 inhibited cell viability and spheroid formation, and induced
apoptosis by activation of caspase-3 and cleavage of poly-ADP ribose polymerase
(PARP). NVP-LDE-225 induced expression of Bax and Bak, and inhibited the
expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, XIAP, cIAP1, cIAP2 and survivin. NVP-LDE-225
inhibited Gli transcriptional activity, Gli-DNA interaction and the expression of
Gli1, Gli2, Patched1 and Patched-2 in prostate CSCs. Interestingly, NVP-LDE-225
induced PDCD4 and apoptosis and inhibited cell viability by suppressing miR-21.
Furthermore, NVP-LDE-225 inhibited pluripotency-maintaining factors Nanog, Oct-4,
c-Myc and Sox-2. The inhibition of Bmi-1 by NVP-LDE-225 was regulated by
upregulation of miR-128. NVP-LDE-225 suppressed EMT by upregulating E-cadherin
and inhibiting N-cadherin, Snail, Slug and Zeb1 by regulating the miR-200 family.
Finally, NVP-LDE-225 inhibited CSC tumor growth, which was associated with the
suppression of Gli1, Gli2, Patched-1, Patched-2, Cyclin D1, Bmi-1 and PCNA and
cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP in tumor tissues derived from NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null 
mice. Overall, our findings suggest that inhibition of the Shh signaling pathway 
could therefore be a novel therapeutic option in treating prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3641359
PMID: 23567619  [PubMed]


80. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060315. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Helicobacter pylori initiates a mesenchymal transition through ZEB1 in gastric
epithelial cells.

Baud J(1), Varon C, Chabas S, Chambonnier L, Darfeuille F, Staedel C.

Author information: 
(1)University Bordeaux, ARNA Laboratory, Bordeaux, France.

Chronic Helicobacter pylori infection provokes an inflammation of the gastric
mucosa, at high risk for ulcer and cancer development. The most virulent strains 
harbor the cag pathogenicity island (cagPAI) encoding a type 4 secretion system, 
which allows delivery of bacterial effectors into gastric epithelial cells,
inducing pro-inflammatory responses and phenotypic alterations reminiscent of an 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This study characterizes EMT features
in H. pylori-infected gastric epithelial cells, and investigates their
relationship with NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Cultured human gastric epithelial cell lines 
were challenged with a cagPAI+ H. pylori strain or cag isogenic mutants.
Morphological changes, epithelial and mesenchymal gene expression and EMT-related
microRNAs were studied. H. pylori up-regulates mesenchymal markers, including
ZEB1. This transcription factor is prominently involved in the mesenchymal
transition of infected cells and its up-regulation depends on cagPAI and NF-<U+03BA>B
activation. ZEB1 expression and NF-<U+03BA>B activation were confirmed by
immunohistochemistry in gastric mucosa from cagPAI+ H. pylori-infected patients. 
Gastric epithelial cell lines express high miR-200 levels, which are linked to
ZEB1 in a reciprocal negative feedback loop and maintain their epithelial
phenotype in non-infected conditions. However, miR-200b/c were increased upon
infection, despite ZEB1 up-regulation and mesenchymal morphology. In the
miR-200b-200a-429 cluster promoter, we identified a functional NF-<U+03BA>B binding
site, recruiting NF-<U+03BA>B upon infection and trans-activating the microRNA cluster
transcription. In conclusion, in gastric epithelial cells, cagPAI+ H. pylori
activates NF-<U+03BA>B, which transactivates ZEB1, subsequently promoting mesenchymal
transition. The unexpected N-F<U+03BA>B-dependent increase of miR-200 levels likely
thwarts the irreversible loss of epithelial identity in that critical situation.

PMCID: PMC3614934
PMID: 23565224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Vis. 2013;19:575-80. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Exclusion of pathogenic promoter region variants and identification of novel
nonsense mutations in the zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 gene in posterior 
polymorphous corneal dystrophy.

Bakhtiari P(1), Frausto RF, Roldan AN, Wang C, Yu F, Aldave AJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-7003, USA.

PURPOSE: To report the identification of five novel nonsense mutations in the
zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) gene and exclusion of promoter region
mutations in individuals without ZEB1 coding region mutations in posterior
polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD).
METHODS: Slit-lamp examination and DNA collection were performed for individuals 
diagnosed with PPCD and, when available, affected and unaffected family members. 
Genomic DNA prepared from peripheral blood leukocytes and buccal epithelial cells
underwent PCR amplification and automated sequencing of the ZEB1 gene and 1 kb 5'
of ZEB1, presumably containing the ZEB1 promoter region.
RESULTS: Thirteen unrelated individuals with PPCD were identified, and genomic
DNA was collected from each individual. ZEB1 mutations were identified in six of 
the 13 probands, five of which were novel: p.(Gly150Alafs*36; spontaneous),
p.(His230Argfs*7), p.(Ser638Cysfs*5), p.(Glu1039Glyfs*6), and p.(Gln884Argfs*37).
Screening of the ZEB1 promoter region in 31 probands with PPCD without a ZEB1
coding region mutation identified only two known single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) whose frequency in the affected probands did not differ significantly from
that in the general population.
CONCLUSIONS: We report five novel frame-shift mutations, one confirmed as
spontaneous, in the ZEB1 gene associated with PPCD, bringing the total number of 
reported pathogenic mutations to 24, and the percentage of PPCD associated with
ZEB1 mutations to 32%. The absence of ZEB1 promoter region mutations in probands 
without a ZEB1 coding region mutation indicates that other genetic loci, such as 
the PPCD1 locus, are involved in the pathogenesis of PPCD.

PMCID: PMC3611940
PMID: 23559851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059083. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 induces E-cadherin down-regulation via PI3K/Akt/mTOR
and MAPK/ERK signaling in ovarian cancer cells.

Lau MT(1), So WK, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) is produced by ovarian cancer cells and it has 
been suggested to play an important role in tumor progression. In this study, we 
report that FGF2 treatment down-regulated E-cadherin by up-regulating its
transcriptional repressors, Slug and ZEB1, in human ovarian cancer cells. The
pharmacological inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K), mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR), and MEK suggests that both PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK/ERK
signaling are required for FGF2-induced E-cadherin down-regulation. Moreover,
FGF2 up-regulated Slug and ZEB1 expression via the PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK/ERK
signaling pathways, respectively. Finally, FGF2-induced cell invasion was
abolished by the inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK/ERK pathways, and the
forced expression of E-cadherin diminished the intrinsic invasiveness of ovarian 
cancer cells as well as the FGF2-induced cell invasion. This study demonstrates a
novel mechanism in which FGF2 down-regulates E-cadherin expression through the
activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK/ERK signaling, and the up-regulation of Slug
and ZEB1 in human ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3598697
PMID: 23554977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Stem Cells. 2013 Jul;31(7):1350-62. doi: 10.1002/stem.1382.

Repression of Zeb1 and hypoxia cause sequential mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transition and induction of aid, Oct4, and Dnmt1, leading to immortalization and 
multipotential reprogramming of fibroblasts in spheres.

Liu Y(1), Mukhopadhyay P, Pisano MM, Lu X, Huang L, Lu Q, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Louisville, KY, USA.

In this study, we demonstrate that sphere formation triggers immortalization and 
stable reprogramming of mouse fibroblasts. Cell contact signaling in spheres
causes downregulation of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition transcription
factor Zeb1 leading to rapid mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition. Hypoxia within
spheres together with loss of Zeb1 repression synergize to cause superinduction
of Hif1a, which in turn leads to induction of the DNA demethylase Aid/Aicda,
demethylation of the Oct4 promoter/enhancer and multipotency. Oct4 and Nanog
expression diminish when cells are removed from the hypoxic environment of
spheres and placed in monolayer culture, but the cells retain multipotential
capacity, demonstrating stable reprogramming and a gene expression pattern
resembling adult stem cells. Oct4 has been shown to induce Dnmt1 in mesenchymal
stem cells, and we link Oct4 and Dnmt1 to silencing of cell cycle inhibitory
cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors and Arf, and immortalization of the
reprogrammed fibroblasts. Sphere formation then represents a novel and rapid
protocol for immortalization and stable reprogramming of fibroblasts to
multipotency that does not require exogenous expression of a stem cell factor or 
a lineage-specifying transcription factor.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4265806
PMID: 23554223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Oct;228(10):2054-62. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24372.

Epigallocatechin gallate inhibits growth and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
in human thyroid carcinoma cell lines.

De Amicis F(1), Perri A, Vizza D, Russo A, Panno ML, Bonofiglio D, Giordano C,
Mauro L, Aquila S, Tramontano D, Andò S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Sanitario, University of Calabria, Calabria, Italy.

Well-differentiated papillary and follicular thyroid carcinoma are the most
frequent types of thyroid cancer and the prognosis is generally favorable
however, a number of patients develops recurrences. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate
(EGCG), a major catechin in green tea, was shown to possess remarkable
therapeutic potential against various types of human cancers, although data on
thyroid cancer cells are still lacking. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the effect of EGCG on the proliferation and motility of human thyroid papillary
(FB-2) and follicular (WRO) carcinoma cell lines. Our results demonstrate that
EGCG (10, 40, 60 µM) treatment inhibited the growth of FB-2 and WRO cells in a
dose-dependent manner. These changes were associated with reduced cyclin D1,
increased p21 and p53 expression. Furthermore, EGCG suppressed phosphorylation of
AKT and ERK1/2. In addition EGCG treatment results in reduction of cell motility 
and migration. Changes in motility and migration in FB-2 were associated with
modulation in the expression of several proteins involved in cell adhesion and
reorganization of actin cytoskeleton. After 24 h EGCG caused an increase of the
E-cadherin expression and a concomitant decrease of SNAIL, ZEB and the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor TWIST. Besides expression of Vimentin,
N-cadherin and a5-integrin was down-regulated. These data well correlate with a
reduction of MMP9 activity as evidenced by gelatin zymography. Our findings
support the inhibitory role of EGCG on thyroid cancer cell proliferation and
motility with concomitant loss of epithelial-to-mesenchymal cell transition
markers.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23553645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncogenesis. 2013 Mar 25;2:e39. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.4.

A mechanism of resistance to gefitinib mediated by cellular reprogramming and the
acquisition of an FGF2-FGFR1 autocrine growth loop.

Ware KE(1), Hinz TK, Kleczko E, Singleton KR, Marek LA, Helfrich BA, Cummings CT,
Graham DK, Astling D, Tan AC, Heasley LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

Despite initial and often dramatic responses of epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR)-addicted lung tumors to the EGFR-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), gefitinib and erlotinib, nearly all develop resistance and relapse. To
explore novel mechanisms mediating acquired resistance, we employed
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines bearing activating mutations in
EGFR and rendered them resistant to EGFR-specific TKIs through chronic adaptation
in tissue culture. In addition to previously observed resistance mechanisms
including EGFR-T790M 'gate-keeper' mutations and MET amplification, a subset of
the seven chronically adapted NSCLC cell lines including HCC4006, HCC2279 and
H1650 cells exhibited marked induction of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2 and
FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) mRNA and protein. Also, adaptation to EGFR-specific TKIs
was accompanied by an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) as assessed by
changes in CDH1, VIM, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression and altered growth properties in
Matrigel. In adapted cell lines exhibiting increased FGF2 and FGFR1 expression,
measures of growth and signaling, but not EMT, were blocked by FGFR-specific
TKIs, an FGF-ligand trap and FGFR1 silencing with RNAi. In parental HCC4006
cells, cell growth was strongly inhibited by gefitinib, although drug-resistant
clones progress within 10 days. Combined treatment with gefitinib and AZD4547, an
FGFR-specific TKI, prevented the outgrowth of drug-resistant clones. Thus,
induction of FGF2 and FGFR1 following chronic adaptation to EGFR-specific TKIs
provides a novel autocrine receptor tyrosine kinase-driven bypass pathway in a
subset of lung cancer cell lines that are initially sensitive to EGFR-specific
TKIs. The findings support FGFR-specific TKIs as potentially valuable additions
to existing targeted therapeutic strategies with EGFR-specific TKIs to prevent or
delay acquired resistance in EGFR-driven NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3641357
PMID: 23552882  [PubMed]


86. BMC Cancer. 2013 Apr 1;13:171. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-171.

Membrane Type 1 Matrix Metalloproteinase induces an epithelial to mesenchymal
transition and cancer stem cell-like properties in SCC9 cells.

Yang CC(1), Zhu LF, Xu XH, Ning TY, Ye JH, Liu LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science of Stomatology, Institute of Stomatology, Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Tissue invasion and metastasis are acquired abilities of cancer and
related to the death in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Emerging
observations indicate that the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is
associated with tumor progression and the generation of cells with cancer stem
cells (CSCs) properties. Membrane Type 1 Matrix Metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) is a 
cell surface proteinase, which is involved in degrading extracellular matrix
components that can promote tumor invasion and cell migration.
METHODS: In the current study, we utilized SCC9 cells stably transfected with an 
empty vector (SCC9-N) or a vector encoding human MT1-MMP (SCC9-M) to study the
role of MT1-MMP in EMT development.
RESULTS: Upon up-regulation of MT1-MMP, SCC9-M cells underwent EMT, in which they
presented a fibroblast-like phenotype and had a decreased expression of
epithelial markers (E-cadherin, cytokeratin18 and ß-catenin) and an increased
expression of mesenchymal markers (vimentin and fibronectin). We further
demonstrated that MT1-MMP-induced morphologic changes increased the level of
Twist and ZEB, and were dependent on repressing the transcription of E-cadherin. 
These activities resulted in low adhesive, high invasive abilities of the SCC9-M 
cells. Furthermore, MT1-MMP-induced transformed cells exhibited cancer stem cell 
(CSC)-like characteristics, such as low proliferation, self-renewal ability,
resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs and apoptosis, and expression of CSCs
surface markers.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our study indicates that overexpression of MT1-MMP
induces EMT and results in the acquisition of CSC-like properties in SCC9 cells. 
Our growing understanding of the mechanism regulating EMT may provide new targets
against invasion and metastasis in OSCC.

PMCID: PMC3637131
PMID: 23548172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Med Rep. 2013 May;7(5):1579-84. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1403. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

miRNA-200c increases the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to doxorubicin
through the suppression of E-cadherin-mediated PTEN/Akt signaling.

Chen Y(1), Sun Y, Chen L, Xu X, Zhang X, Wang B, Min L, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Subei People's Hospital, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
225000, PR China.

Doxorubicin (ADR) is successfully used to treat breast cancer, however, it is
often associated with the acquired resistance of breast cancer cells which
eliminates the therapeutic efficiency of ADR, leading to relapse and a poorer
prognosis. It has been reported that microRNA-200c (miRNA-200c), a non-coding
RNA, is important in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
metastasis in breast cancer cells. Recent evidence demonstrated that miRNA-200c
is also regulated in chemotherapeutic drug resistance, however, the precise
mechanism by which this occurs remains unclear. In this study, we demonstrated
that the loss of miRNA-200c correlates with the acquired resistance of breast
cancer cells to ADR. In addition, the loss of miRNA-200c correlated with
decreased levels of E-cadherin and PTEN, and increased levels of ZEB1 and
phospho-Akt (p-Akt) in ADR-resistant breast cancer cells (MCF-7/ADR cells). More 
importantly, we demonstrated that the gain of miRNA-200c results in an increased 
sensitivity of cells to ADR, downregulation of ZEB1, upregulation of E-cadherin
and PTEN, and inactivation of Akt signaling. Following the co-transfection of
E-cadherin siRNA, the miRNA-200c-mediated regulation of Akt signaling and PTEN
was inhibited. Results of the present study also demonstrated that Akt signaling 
is involved in the ADR resistance of breast cancer cells since LY294002, an
inhibitor of Akt signaling, partially restored the sensitivity of MCF-7/ADR cells
to ADR. In conclusion, miRNA-200c inhibited Akt signaling through its effects on 
E-cadherin and PTEN, resulting in the inhibition of ADR resistance in breast
cancer cells.

PMID: 23546450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jun;29(6):2408-14. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2370. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 attenuates the metastasis of non-small cell lung 
cancer through inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Qian YR(1), Guo Y, Wan HY, Fan L, Feng Y, Ni L, Xiang Y, Li QY.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Department, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, PR China. spriteqian@163.com

Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a key enzyme of the renin-angiotensin
system (RAS). ACE2 plays a critical counterbalancing role by degrading
angiotensin II (Ang II) to Ang 1-7. Recent studies suggest that RAS influences
tumor growth and development by its paracrine effects on the tumor
microenvironment. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is now thought to be a 
process that plays a fundamental role in tumor progression and metastasis. In the
present study, we investigated the role of ACE2 in lung cancer metastasis and the
mechanism of EMT. This is the first study to elucidate the mechanism through
which the overexpression of ACE2 in the A549 lung cancer cell line decreases
metastasis formation in vivo and upregulates the expression of E-cadherin both
in vitro and in vivo. We also observed the downregulation of vimentin, which
supports a role of ACE2 in influencing EMT in lung cancer. Further analysis
indicated that ACE2 abrogated the upregulation of TGF-ß1-induced EMT markers,
such as vimentin and a-smooth muscle actin (aSMA) in vitro in A549 cells.
Finally, exposing A549 cells stably expressing ACE2 to DX600, an inhibitor of
ACE2, recovered the sensitivity of lung cancer cells to TGF-ß1-mediated induction
of EMT. Our study demonstrated that ACE2 attenuated the metastasis of lung cancer
and may serve as a target for new strategies to inhibit EMT in cancer cells.

PMID: 23545945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Front Pharmacol. 2013 Mar 28;4:35. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2013.00035. eCollection
2013.

Association of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition phenotype with
responsiveness to the p21-activated kinase inhibitor, PF-3758309, in colon cancer
models.

Pitts TM(1), Kulikowski GN, Tan AC, Murray BW, Arcaroli JJ, Tentler JJ, Spreafico
A, Selby HM, Kachaeva MI, McPhillips KL, Britt BC, Bradshaw-Pierce EL,
Messersmith WA, Varella-Garcia M, Eckhardt SG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
Aurora, CO, USA.

The p21-activated kinase (PAK) family of serine/threonine kinases, which are
overexpressed in several cancer types, are critical mediators of cell survival,
motility, mitosis, transcription, and translation. In the study presented here,
we utilized a panel of colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines to identify potential
biomarkers of sensitivity or resistance that may be used to individualize therapy
to the PAK inhibitor PF-03758309. We observed a wide range of proliferative
responses in the CRC cell lines exposed to PF-03758309, this response was
recapitulated in other phenotypic assays such as anchorage-independent growth,
three-dimensional (3D) tumor spheroid formation, and migration. Interestingly, we
observed that cells most sensitive to PF-03758309 exhibited up-regulation of
genes associated with a mesenchymal phenotype (CALD1, VIM, ZEB1) and cells more
resistant had an up-regulation of genes associated with an epithelial phenotype
(CLDN2, CDH1, CLDN3, CDH17) allowing us to derive an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) gene signature for this agent. We assessed the functional role
of EMT-associated genes in mediating responsiveness to PF-3758309, by targeting
known genes and transcriptional regulators of EMT. We observed that suppression
of genes associated with the mesenchymal phenotype conferred resistance to
PF-3758309, in vitro and in vivo. These results indicate that PAK inhibition is
associated with a unique response phenotype in CRC and that further studies
should be conducted to facilitate both patient selection and rational combination
strategies with these agents.

PMCID: PMC3610060
PMID: 23543898  [PubMed]


90. Oncotarget. 2013 Mar;4(3):446-62.

The paradox of E-cadherin: role in response to hypoxia in the tumor
microenvironment and regulation of energy metabolism.

Chu K(1), Boley KM, Moraes R, Barsky SH, Robertson FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

E-Cadherin is a cell:cell adhesion molecule critical for appropriate embryonic
and mammary development. In cancer, E-Cadherin has been primarily viewed as being
lost during the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which occurs 
with a switch from E-Cadherin expression to a gain of N-Cadherin and other
mesenchymal markers. EMT has been shown to play a role in the metastatic process 
while the reverse process, mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), is important 
for metastatic colonization. Here we report an unexpected role of E-Cadherin in
regulating tumorigenicity and hypoxia responses of breast tumors in vivo. Reduced
expression of E-Cadherin led to a dramatic reduction of the in vivo growth
capability of SUM149, Mary-X and 4T1 tumor cells. Furthermore, over-expression of
ZEB1, a known transcriptional repressor of E-Cadherin, led to reduced in vivo
growth of SUM149 tumors. Gene set enrichment analysis identified the loss of
hypoxia response genes as a major mechanism in mediating the lack of in vivo
growth of SUM149 cells that lacked E-Cadherin or over-expressed ZEB1. The in vivo
growth defect of SUM149 E-Cadherin knockdown tumors was rescued by the
hypoxia-inducible 1a transcription factor (HIF-1a). Given the importance of
HIF-1a in cellular metabolism, we observed reduced glycolytic capacity in SUM149 
and 4T1 cells that had E-Cadherin knocked down. Our observations shed light on
the complex functions of E-Cadherin in retention of an epithelial phenotype and
as a mediator of survival of aggressive breast cancer under hypoxic conditions in
vivo. Furthermore, we find that patients with basal subtype breast cancer and
high E-Cadherin expression in their tumors had a poor clinical outcome. Our data 
suggests a novel function for E-Cadherin as a bona fide signaling molecule
required for the in vivo growth of aggressive breast cancer tumor cells, that
retain E-Cadherin expression, in mediating their metabolic function.

PMCID: PMC3717307
PMID: 23530113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 May 15;269(1):61-71. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.03.006. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition during oncogenic transformation induced by
hexavalent chromium involves reactive oxygen species-dependent mechanism in lung 
epithelial cells.

Ding SZ(1), Yang YX, Li XL, Michelli-Rivera A, Han SY, Wang L, Pratheeshkumar P, 
Wang X, Lu J, Yin YQ, Budhraja A, Hitron AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou
University, Wei-Wu Road, Zhengzhou, Henan 450000, PR China.
dingsongze@hotmail.com

Hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] is an important human carcinogen associated with
pulmonary diseases and lung cancer. Exposure to Cr(VI) induces DNA damage, cell
morphological change and malignant transformation in human lung epithelial cells.
Despite extensive studies, the molecular mechanisms remain elusive, it is also
not known if Cr(VI)-induced transformation might accompany with invasive
properties to facilitate metastasis. We aimed to study Cr(VI)-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invasion during oncogenic
transformation in lung epithelial cells. The results showed that Cr(VI) at low
doses represses E-cadherin mRNA and protein expression, enhances mesenchymal
marker vimentin expression and transforms the epithelial cell into fibroblastoid 
morphology. Cr(VI) also increases cell invasion and promotes colony formation.
Further studies indicated that Cr(VI) uses multiple mechanisms to repress
E-cadherin expression, including activation of E-cadherin repressors such as
Slug, ZEB1, KLF8 and enhancement the binding of HDAC1 in E-cadherin gene
promoter, but DNA methylation is not responsible for the loss of E-cadherin.
Catalase reduces Cr(VI)-induced E-cadherin and vimentin protein expression,
attenuates cell invasion in matrigel and colony formation on soft agar. These
results demonstrate that exposure to a common human carcinogen, Cr(VI), induces
EMT and invasion during oncogenic transformation in lung epithelial cells and
implicate in cancer metastasis and prevention.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3664092
PMID: 23518002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Transl Med. 2013 Mar 5;11:57. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-57.

A systematic evaluation of miRNA:mRNA interactions involved in the migration and 
invasion of breast cancer cells.

Luo D(1), Wilson JM, Harvel N, Liu J, Pei L, Huang S, Hawthorn L, Shi H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, PR China.

In this study we performed a systematic evaluation of functional miRNA-mRNA
interactions associated with the invasiveness of breast cancer cells using a
combination of integrated miRNA and mRNA expression profiling, bioinformatics
prediction, and functional assays. Analysis of the miRNA expression identified 11
miRNAs that were differentially expressed, including 7 down-regulated (miR-200c, 
miR-205, miR-203, miR-141, miR-34a, miR-183, and miR-375) and 4 up-regulated
miRNAs (miR-146a, miR-138, miR-125b1 and miR-100), in invasive cell lines when
compared to normal and less invasive cell lines. Transfection of miR-200c,
miR-205, and miR-375 mimics into MDA-MB-231 cells led to the inhibition of in
vitro cell migration and invasion. The integrated analysis of miRNA and mRNA
expression identified 35 known and novel target genes of miR-200c, miR-205, and
mir-375, including CFL2, LAMC1, TIMP2, ZEB1, CDH11, PRKCA, PTPRJ, PTPRM, LDHB,
and SEC23A. Surprisingly, the majority of these genes (27 genes) were target
genes of miR-200c, suggesting that miR-200c plays a pivotal role in regulating
the invasiveness of breast cancer cells. We characterized one of the target genes
of miR-200c, CFL2, and demonstrated that CFL2 is overexpressed in aggressive
breast cancer cell lines and can be significantly down-regulated by exogenous
miR-200c. Tissue microarray analysis further revealed that CFL2 expression in
primary breast cancer tissue correlated with tumor grade. The results obtained
from this study may improve our understanding of the role of these candidate
miRNAs and their target genes in relation to breast cancer invasiveness and
ultimately lead to the identification of novel biomarkers associated with
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3599769
PMID: 23497265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Mar 14;4:e541. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.22.

miR-200b inhibits TGF-ß1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition and promotes
growth of intestinal epithelial cells.

Chen Y(1), Xiao Y, Ge W, Zhou K, Wen J, Yan W, Wang Y, Wang B, Qu C, Wu J, Xu L, 
Cai W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Xin Hua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which consists of Crohn's disease (CD) and
ulcerative colitis (UC), is a chronic, inflammatory disorder of the
gastro-intestinal tract with unknown etiology. Current evidence suggests that
intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) is prominently linked to the pathogenesis of
IBD. Therefore, maintaining the intact of epithelium has potential roles in
improving pathophysiology and clinical outcomes of IBD. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) act as
post-transcriptional gene regulators and regulate many biological processes,
including embryonal development, cell differentiation, apoptosis and
proliferation. In this study, we found that miR-200b decreased significantly in
inflamed mucosa of IBD, especially for UC, when compared with their adjacent
normal tissue. Simultaneously, we also found that the genes of E-cadherin and
cyclin D1 were reduced significantly and correlated positively to the miR-200b.
In addition, the upregulation of transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-ß1) was
inversely correlated to the miR-200b in IBD. To investigate the possible roles of
miR-200b in IECs maintaining, we used TGF-ß1 to induce epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in IEC-6 initially. After sustained over-expressing miR-200b in 
IEC-6, the EMT was inhibited significantly that was characterized by
downregulation of vimentin and upregulation of E-cadherin. Furthermore, we found 
that miR-200b enhanced E-cadherin expression through targeting of ZEB1, which
encode transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin. SMAD2 was found to act as a
target of miR-200b with direct evidence that miR-200b binding to the 3' UTR of
SAMD2 and the ability of miR-200b to repress SMAD2 protein expression. With SMAD2
depletion, the expression of vimentin decreased correspondingly, which suggested 
miR-200b might reduce vimentin through regulating the SMAD2. With endogenous
over-expression of miR-200b, the proliferation of IEC-6 cells increased
significantly by increasing S-phase entry and promoting expression of the protein
cyclin D1. Summarily, our study suggested a potential role for mir-200b in
maintaining intact of intestinal epithelium through inhibiting EMT and promoting 
proliferation of IECs.

PMCID: PMC3613822
PMID: 23492772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057968. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

14-3-3e overexpression contributes to epithelial-mesenchymal transition of
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Liu TA(1), Jan YJ, Ko BS, Liang SM, Chen SC, Wang J, Hsu C, Wu YM, Liou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: 14-3-3e is implicated in regulating tumor progression, including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Our earlier study indicated that elevated 14-3-3e
expression is significantly associated with higher risk of metastasis and lower
survival rates of HCC patients. However, the molecular mechanisms of how 14-3-3e 
regulates HCC tumor metastasis are still unclear.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we show that increased 14-3-3e
expression induces HCC cell migration and promotes epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which is determined by the reduction of E-cadherin expression
and induction of N-cadherin and vimentin expression. Knockdown with specific
siRNA abolished 14-3-3e-induced cell migration and EMT. Furthermore, 14-3-3e
selectively induced Zeb-1 and Snail expression, and 14-3-3e-induced cell
migration was abrogated by Zeb-1 or Snail siRNA. In addition, the effect of
14-3-3e-reduced E-cadherin was specifically restored by Zeb-1 siRNA. Positive
14-3-3e expression was significantly correlated with negative E-cadherin
expression, as determined by immunohistochemistry analysis in HCC tumors.
Analysis of 14-3-3e/E-cadherin expression associated with clinicopathological
characteristics revealed that the combination of positive 14-3-3e and negative
E-cadherin expression is significantly correlated with higher incidence of HCC
metastasis and poor 5-year overall survival. In contrast, patients with positive 
14-3-3e and positive E-cadherin expression had better prognostic outcomes than
did those with negative E-cadherin expression.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings show for the first time that E-cadherin is one of the 
downstream targets of 14-3-3e in modulating HCC tumor progression. Thus, 14-3-3e 
may act as an important regulator in modulating tumor metastasis by promoting EMT
as well as cell migration, and it may serve as a novel prognostic biomarker or
therapeutic target for HCC.

PMCID: PMC3590290
PMID: 23483955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Biol Int. 2013 Jul;37(7):669-74. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10087. Epub 2013 May 20.

Aberrant expression of microRNAs involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition of
HT-29 cell line.

Cai ZG(1), Zhang SM, Zhang H, Zhou YY, Wu HB, Xu XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Number 455 Hospital of The Chinese
People's Liberation Army, Shanghai 200052, China. caizg12345@yahoo.com.cn

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an essential step for cancer
metastasis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate
target-mRNAs post-transcriptionally. The expression and function of miRNAs in EMT
of HT-29 colonic cells remain elusive. This study looks at expression of miRNAs
in EMT and explores the effects of miRNAs on EMT in HT-29 cell line. HT-29 was
treated with TGF ß to establish an EMT model, in which a collection of miRNAs was
dynamically regulated by real-time PCR (qPCR) analysis. Among them, miR-21 and
miR-27 were significantly upregulated, while miR-22, miR-26, miR-30, miR-181,
miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-214 were markedly downregulated. MiRNA-inhibitors were
used to knockdown miRNAs in HT-29 and EMT markers were determined by qPCR to
monitor the effects of miRNAs on EMT process. Results showed that miR-22 could
not alter the expression of EMT markers, while knockdown of miR-200b could
significantly increase that of epithelial markers, N-cadherin, Vimentin, a-Sma
and Twist1 and decrease that of mesenchymal marker, E-cadherin. Bioinformatic
analysis and Western blot showed that ZEB1 was directly suppressed by miR-200b.
In conclusion, miRNAs are dynamically regulated in TGF ß-induced EMT of HT-29 and
miR-200b was essential for EMT by suppressing the expression of ZEB1 in HT-29.

© 2013 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 23483606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Jun;15(6):691-706. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not011. Epub 2013 Mar
12.

NPV-LDE-225 (Erismodegib) inhibits epithelial mesenchymal transition and
self-renewal of glioblastoma initiating cells by regulating miR-21, miR-128, and 
miR-200.

Fu J(1), Rodova M, Nanta R, Meeker D, Van Veldhuizen PJ, Srivastava RK, Shankar
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common form of primary brain
tumor, often characterized by poor survival. Glioblastoma initiating cells (GICs)
regulate self-renewal, differentiation, and tumor initiation properties and are
involved in tumor growth, recurrence, and resistance to conventional treatments. 
The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is essential for normal development
and embryonic morphogenesis. The objectives of this study were to examine the
molecular mechanisms by which GIC characteristics are regulated by NPV-LDE-225
(Smoothened inhibitor;
(2,2'-[[dihydro-2-(4-pyridinyl)-1,3(2H,4H)-pyrimidinediyl]bis(methylene)]bis[N,N-
dimethylbenzenamine).
METHODS: Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by XTT and annexin
V-propidium iodide assay, respectively. Gli translocation and transcriptional
activities were measured by immunofluorescence and luciferase assay,
respectively. Gene and protein expressions were measured by quantitative
real-time PCR and Western blot analyses, respectively.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: NPV-LDE-225 inhibited cell viability, neurosphere
formation, and Gli transcriptional activity and induced apoptosis by activation
of caspase-3 and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. NPV-LDE-225 increased
the expression of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-R1/DR4, TRAIL-R2/DR5, and Fas and decreased the expression of platelet
derived growth factor receptor-a and Bcl2, and these effects were abrogated by
Gli1 plus Gli2 short hairpin RNAs. NPV-LDE-225 enhanced the therapeutic potential
of FasL and TRAIL by upregulating Fas and DR4/5, respectively. Interestingly,
NPV-LDE-225 induced expression of programmed cell death 4 and apoptosis and
inhibited cell viability by suppressing micro RNA (miR)-21. Furthermore,
NPV-LDE-225 inhibited pluripotency-maintaining factors Nanog, Oct4, Sox2, and
cMyc. The inhibition of Bmi1 by NPV-LDE-225 was regulated by induction of
miR-128. Finally, NPV-LDE-225 suppressed epithelial-mesenchymal transition by
upregulating E-cadherin and inhibiting N-cadherin, Snail, Slug, and Zeb1 through 
modulating the miR-200 family. Our data highlight the importance of the SHH
pathway for self-renewal and early metastasis of GICs.

PMCID: PMC3661095
PMID: 23482671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Apr;72(4):351-66. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31828bfc60.

Transforming growth factor-ß1 may be a key mediator of the fibrogenic properties 
of neural cells in leprosy.

Petito RB(1), Amadeu TP, Pascarelli BM, Jardim MR, Vital RT, Antunes SL, Sarno
EN.

Author information: 
(1)Leprosy Laboratory, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fluminense Federal University,
Niterói (RTV), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Fibrosis is the main cause of irreversible nerve damage in leprosy. Phenotypic
changes in Mycobacterium leprae (ML)-infected Schwann cells (SCs) have been
suggested to mediate this process. We found that SC line cultures stimulated with
ML upregulated transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1), and that TGF-ß1 or ML
induced increased numbers of a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA)-positive cells with
characteristic stress fibers. Mycobacterium leprae and TGF-ß1 also induced
increased type I collagen and fibronectin mRNA and secretion and augmented mRNA
levels of SOX9 and ZEB1, which are involved in the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. These effects could be inhibited by the TGF-ß1 type I receptor (ALK5)
inhibitor, SB-431542. In nerve biopsies from leprosy-infected patients with
varying grades of fibrosis (n = 11), type I and III collagen and fibronectin were
found in the endoneurium and perineurium, a-SMA-positive cells filled the
fibrotic perineurium but not the endoneurium, and CD34-positive fibroblasts
predominated in the endoneurium. Results of transcriptional studies of 3 leprosy 
nerves and 5 controls were consistent with these data, but a-SMA and other mRNA
levels were not different from those in the control samples. Our findings suggest
that TGF-ß1 may orchestrate events, including reprogramming of the SC phenotype, 
leading to transdifferentiation, connective tissue cell expansion, and
fibrogenesis in the evolution of leprosy nerve lesions during some evolutionary
stages.

PMID: 23481710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 6;33(10):1325-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.53. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

Loss of the polycomb protein Mel-18 enhances the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition by ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression through the downregulation of miR-205 in
breast cancer.

Lee JY(1), Park MK(2), Park JH(3), Lee HJ(2), Shin DH(3), Kang Y(4), Lee CH(2),
Kong G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research (IBBR), Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea. (2)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk University, Seoul,
Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University,
Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA. (5)1] Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical
Research (IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea [2] Department of Pathology,
College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the pivotal mechanism underlying
the initiation of cancer invasion and metastasis. Although Mel-18 has been
implicated in several biological processes in cancer, its function in the EMT of 
human cancers has not yet been studied. Here, we demonstrate that Mel-18
negatively regulates the EMT by epigenetically modulating miR-205. We identified 
miR-205 as a novel target of Mel-18 using a microRNA microarray analysis and
found that Mel-18 increased miR-205 transcription by the inhibition of DNA
methyltransferase-mediated DNA methylation of the miR-205 promoter, thereby
downregulating its target genes, ZEB1 and ZEB2. Furthermore, the loss of Mel-18
promoted ZEB1- and ZEB2-mediated downregulation of E-cadherin transcription and
also enhanced the expression of mesenchymal markers, leading to increased
migration and invasion in MCF-7 cells. In MDA-MB-231 cells, Mel-18 overexpression
restored E-cadherin expression, resulting in reduced migration and invasion.
These effects were reversed by miR-205 overexpression or inhibition. A tumor
xenograft with Mel-18 knockdown MCF-7 cells consistently showed increased ZEB1
and ZEB2 expression and decreased E-cadherin expression. Taken together, these
results suggest that Mel-18 functions as a tumor suppressor by its novel negative
control of the EMT, achieved through regulating the expression of miR-205 and its
target genes, ZEB1 and ZEB2.

PMID: 23474752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057284. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors-1 and -3 play distinct roles in the regulation
of bladder cancer growth and metastasis: implications for therapeutic targeting.

Cheng T(1), Roth B, Choi W, Black PC, Dinney C, McConkey DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) are activated by mutation and
overexpressed in bladder cancers (BCs), and FGFR inhibitors are currently being
evaluated in clinical trials in BC patients. However, BC cells display marked
heterogeneity in their responses to FGFR inhibitors, and the biological
mechanisms underlying this heterogeneity are not well defined. Here we used a
novel inhibitor of FGFRs 1-3 and RNAi to determine the effects of inhibiting
FGFR1 or FGFR3 in a panel of human BC cell lines. We observed that FGFR1 was
expressed in BC cells that also expressed the "mesenchymal" markers ZEB1 and
vimentin, whereas FGFR3 expression was restricted to the E-cadherin- and
p63-positive "epithelial" subset. Sensitivity to the growth-inhibitory effects of
BGJ-398 was also restricted to the "epithelial" BC cells and it correlated
directly with FGFR3 mRNA levels but not with the presence of activating FGFR3
mutations. In contrast, BGJ-398 did not strongly inhibit proliferation but did
block invasion in the "mesenchymal" BC cells in vitro. Similarly, BGJ-398 did not
inhibit primary tumor growth but blocked the production of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) and the formation of lymph node and distant metastases in mice
bearing orthotopically implanted "mesenchymal" UM-UC3 cells. Together, our data
demonstrate that FGFR1 and FGFR3 have largely non-overlapping roles in regulating
invasion/metastasis and proliferation in distinct "mesenchymal" and "epithelial" 
subsets of human BC cells. The results suggest that the tumor EMT phenotype will 
be an important determinant of the biological effects of FGFR inhibitors in
patients.

PMCID: PMC3582560
PMID: 23468956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013 May;345(2):206-14. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.203471. Epub 
2013 Mar 5.

Silibinin synergizes with histone deacetylase and DNA methyltransferase
inhibitors in upregulating E-cadherin expression together with inhibition of
migration and invasion of human non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Mateen S(1), Raina K, Agarwal C, Chan D, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 12850 E. Montview Blvd, C238, Aurora, CO
80045, USA.

Aggressive cancers in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phase are
characterized by loss of cell adhesion, repression of E-cadherin, and increased
cell mobility. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) differs in basal level of
E-cadherin; predominantly exhibiting silenced expression due to
epigenetic-related modifications. Accordingly, effective treatments are needed to
modulate these epigenetic events that in turn can positively regulate E-cadherin 
levels. Herein, we investigated silibinin, a natural flavonolignan with
anticancer efficacy against lung cancer, either alone or in combination with
epigenetic therapies to modulate E-cadherin expression in a panel of NSCLC cell
lines. Silibinin combined with HDAC inhibitor Trichostatin A [TSA;
7-[4-(dimethylamino)phenyl]-N-hydroxy-4,6-dimethyl-7-oxohepta-2,4-dienamide] or
DNMT inhibitor 5'-Aza-deoxycytidine (Aza) significantly restored E-cadherin
levels in NSCLC cells harboring epigenetically silenced E-cadherin expression.
These combination treatments also strongly decreased the invasion/migration of
these cells, which further emphasized the biologic significance of E-cadherin
restoration. Treatment of NSCLC cells, with basal E-cadherin levels, by silibinin
further increased the E-cadherin expression and inhibited their migratory and
invasive potential. Additional studies showed that silibinin alone as well as in 
combination with TSA or Aza downmodulate the expression of Zeb1, which is a major
transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin. Overall these findings demonstrate the
potential of combinatorial treatments of silibinin with HDAC or DNMT inhibitor to
modulate EMT events in NSCLC cell lines, leading to a significant inhibition in
their migratory and invasive potentials. These results are highly significant,
since loss of E-cadherin and metastatic spread of the disease via EMT is
associated with poor prognosis and high mortalities in NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3629797
PMID: 23461975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013 Apr;95(4):1181-8. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.01.012.
Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Snail expression is associated with a poor prognosis in malignant pleural
mesotheliomas.

Kobayashi M(1), Huang CL, Sonobe M, Kikuchi R, Ishikawa M, Imamura N, Kitamura J,
Iwakiri S, Itoi K, Yasumizu R, Date H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.

Comment in
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2013 Apr;95(4):1188.

BACKGROUND: Malignant pleural mesotheliomas (MPMs) are aggressive tumors with a
poor prognosis. We aimed to clarify the mechanisms of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in MPMs by analyzing the expressions of EMT-associated
transcription factors and E-cadherin in relation to tumor proliferation rates and
patient survival.
METHODS: One hundred nine patients with MPMs were investigated. Among these
patients, there were 61 epithelioid tumors, 21 sarcomatoid tumors, 20 biphasic
tumors, and 7 desmoplastic tumors. Immunohistochemical analyses were performed to
evaluate the expressions of Snail, ZEB1, Twist, E-cadherin, and the Ki-67
proliferation index.
RESULTS: The expressions of Snail and ZEB1 were significantly higher in the
nonepithelioid tumors than in the epithelioid tumors (p<0.0001 and p=0.0051,
respectively). Furthermore, the E-cadherin expression was significantly lower in 
the Snail-high tumors than in the Snail-low tumors (p=0.0423). The E-cadherin
expression was significantly lower in the nonepithelioid tumors than in the
epithelioid tumors (p=0.0126). The Ki-67 proliferation index was significantly
higher in the nonepithelioid tumors than in the epithelioid tumors (p=0.025).
Patient survival was significantly lower in patients with Snail-high MPMs than in
those with Snail-low MPMs (p=0.0016), especially in patients with nonepithelioid 
tumors (p=0.0089). The multivariate analysis also demonstrated that nuclear Snail
expression was a significant predictor of poor prognosis in patients with MPMs
(p=0.0142).
CONCLUSIONS: The Snail expression is associated with EMT and a poor prognosis in 
MPMs. Snail could be a potential molecular target for the treatment of patients
with MPMs.

Copyright © 2013 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23453740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Feb 28;4:e514. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.37.

MiR203 mediates subversion of stem cell properties during mammary epithelial
differentiation via repression of <U+0394>NP63a and promotes mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transition.

DeCastro AJ(1), Dunphy KA, Hutchinson J, Balboni AL, Cherukuri P, Jerry DJ,
DiRenzo J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Experimental and Molecular Medicine and the Department of
Pharmacology, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA.

During reproductive life, the mammary epithelium undergoes consecutive cycles of 
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Doing so relies on the retained
proliferative capacity, prolonged lifespan and developmental potency of mammary
stem cells (MaSCs). <U+0394>Np63a, the predominant TP63 isoform in mammary epithelia, is
robustly expressed in MaSCs and is required for preservation of self-renewing
capacity in diverse epithelial structures. However, the mechanism(s) underlying
subversion of this activity during forfeiture of self-renewing capacity are
poorly understood. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) govern critical cellular functions
including stem cell maintenance, development, cell cycle regulation and
differentiation by disrupting translation of target mRNAs. Data presented here
indicate that expression of miR203, a miRNA that targets <U+0394>Np63a and <U+0394>Np63ß is
activated during luminal epithelial differentiation and that this pattern is
observed in the murine mammary hierarchy. In addition, we present evidence that
the transcription factor Zeb1 represses miR203 expression, thus enhancing <U+0394>Np63a 
protein levels. Furthermore, ectopic miR203 suppresses <U+0394>Np63a expression,
proliferation and colony formation. The anti-clonogenic effects mediated by
miR203 require suppression of <U+0394>Np63a. In addition, ectopic miR203 promotes
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition and disrupts activities associated with
epithelial stem cells. These studies support a model in which induction of miR203
mediates forfeiture of self-renewing capacity via suppression of <U+0394>Np63a and may
also have anti-tumorigenic activity through its reduction of EMT and cancer stem 
cell populations.

PMCID: PMC3734833
PMID: 23449450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 19;288(16):11572-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.434951. Epub
2013 Feb 26.

Sequential inductions of the ZEB1 transcription factor caused by mutation of Rb
and then Ras proteins are required for tumor initiation and progression.

Liu Y(1), Sánchez-Tilló E, Lu X, Huang L, Clem B, Telang S, Jenson AB,
Cuatrecasas M, Chesney J, Postigo A, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Targets Program, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center,
Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

Rb1 restricts cell cycle progression, and it imposes cell contact inhibition to
suppress tumor outgrowth. It also triggers oncogene-induced senescence to block
Ras mutation. Loss of the Rb1 pathway, which is a hallmark of cancer cells, then 
provides a permissive environment for Ras mutation, and Ras is sufficient for
invasive tumor formation in Rb1 family mutant mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs).
These results demonstrate that sequential mutation of the Rb1 and Ras pathways
comprises a tumor initiation axis. Both Rb1 and Ras regulate expression of the
transcription factor ZEB1, thereby linking tumor initiation to the subsequent
invasion and metastasis, which is induced by ZEB1. ZEB1 acts in a negative
feedback loop to block expression of miR-200, which is thought to facilitate
tumor invasion and metastasis. However, ZEB1 also represses cyclin-dependent
kinase (cdk) inhibitors to control the cell cycle; its mutation in MEFs leads to 
induction of these inhibitors and premature senescence. Here, we provide evidence
for two sequential inductions of ZEB1 during Ras transformation of MEFs. Rb1
constitutively represses cdk inhibitors, and induction of ZEB1 when the Rb1
pathway is lost is required to maintain this repression, allowing for the classic
immortalization and loss of cell contact inhibition seen when the Rb1 pathway is 
lost. In vivo, we show that this induction of ZEB1 is required for Ras-initiated 
tumor formation. ZEB1 is then further induced by Ras, beyond the level seen with 
Rb1 mutation, and this Ras superinduction is required to reach a threshold of
ZEB1 sufficient for repression of miR-200 and tumor invasion.

PMCID: PMC3630860
PMID: 23443660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Neoplasia. 2013 Feb;15(2):180-91.

Down-regulation of the miRNA-200 family at the invasive front of colorectal
cancers with degraded basement membrane indicates EMT is involved in cancer
progression.

Paterson EL(1), Kazenwadel J, Bert AG, Khew-Goodall Y, Ruszkiewicz A, Goodall GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Frome Road, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Cancer progression is a complex series of events thought to incorporate the
reversible developmental process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
In vitro, the microRNA-200 family maintains the epithelial phenotype by
posttranscriptionally inhibiting the E-cadherin repressors, ZEB1 and ZEB2. Here, 
we used in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry to assess expression of
miR-200 and EMT biomarkers in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded human colorectal
adenocarcinomas. In addition, laser capture microdissection and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction were employed to quantify levels of miR-200
in the normal epithelium, tumor core, invasive front, and stroma. We find that
miR-200 is downregulated at the invasive front of colorectal adenocarcinomas that
have destroyed and invaded beyond the basement membrane. However, regional lymph 
node metastases and vascular carcinoma deposits show strong expression of
miR-200, suggesting this family of miRNAs is involved in the recapitulation of
the primary tumor phenotype at metastatic sites. In contrast, adenomas and
adenocarcinomas with intact basement membranes showed uniform miR-200 expression 
from the tumor core to the tumor-host interface. Taken together, these data
support the involvement of EMT and mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in 
the metastasis cascade and show that miR-200 is downregulated in the initial
stages of stromal invasion but is restored at metastatic sites.

PMCID: PMC3579320
PMID: 23441132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jul;34(7):1431-41. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt067. Epub 2013 Feb
22.

Estrogen receptor ß expression induces changes in the microRNA pool in human
colon cancer cells.

Edvardsson K(1), Nguyen-Vu T, Kalasekar SM, Pontén F, Gustafsson JÅ, Williams C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell 
Signaling, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA.

There is epidemiological, animal and in vitro evidence that estrogen receptor ß
(ERß) can mediate protective effects against colon cancer, but the mechanism is
not completely understood. Previous research has indicated critical pathways
whereby ERß acts in an antitumorigenic fashion. In this study, we investigate
ERß's impact on the microRNA (miRNA) pool in colon cancer cells using large-scale
genomic approaches, bioinformatics and focused functional studies. We detect and 
confirm 27 miRNAs to be significantly changed following ERß expression in SW480
colon cancer cells. Among these, the oncogenic miR-17-92 cluster and miR-200a/b
are strongly downregulated. Using target prediction and anticorrelation to gene
expression data followed by focused mechanistic studies, we demonstrate that
repression of miR-17 is a secondary event following ERß's downregulatory effect
on MYC. We show that re-introduction of miR-17 can reverse the antiproliferative 
effects of ERß. The repression of miR-17 also influences cell death upon DNA
damage and mediates regulation of NCOA3 (SRC-3) and CLU in colon cancer cells. We
further determine that the downregulation of miR-200a/b mediates increased ZEB1
while decreasing E-cadherin levels in ERß-expressing colon cancer cells. Changes 
in these genes correspond to significant alterations in morphology and migration.
Our work contributes novel data of ERß and miRNA in the colon. Elucidating the
mechanism of ERß and biomarkers of its activity has significant potential to
impact colon cancer prevention and treatment.

PMID: 23436804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Mar;208(3):223.e1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2013.01.020.

Prevention of preterm birth by progestational agents: what are the molecular
mechanisms?

Nold C(1), Maubert M, Anton L, Yellon S, Elovitz MA.

Author information: 
(1)Maternal and Child Health Research Program, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Christopher.Nold@uphs.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVE: Clinically, vaginal progesterone (VP) and 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone
caproate (17P) have been shown to prevent preterm birth (PTB) in high-risk
populations. We hypothesize that treatment with these agents may prevent PTB by
altering molecular pathways involved in uterine contractility or cervical
remodeling.
STUDY DESIGN: Using a mouse model, on embryonic day (E)14-E17 CD-1 pregnant mice 
were treated with: (1) 0.1 mL of 25 mg/mL of 17P subcutaneously; (2) 0.1 mL of
castor oil subcutaneously; (3) 0.1 mL of 10 mg/mL of progesterone in a
long-lasting Replens (Lil' Drug Store Products, Inc., Cedar Rapids, IA); or (4)
0.1 mL of the same Replens, with 4 dams per treatment group. Mice were sacrificed
6 hours after treatment on E17.5. Cervices and uteri were collected for molecular
analysis.
RESULTS: Exposure to VP significantly increased the expression of defensin 1
compared to Replens (P < .01) on E17.5. Neither VP nor 17P altered the expression
of uterine contraction-associated proteins, progesterone-mediated regulators of
uterine quiescence, microRNA involved in uterine contractility, or pathways
involved in cervical remodeling. In addition, neither agent had an effect on
immune cell trafficking or collagen content in the cervix.
CONCLUSION: Neither VP nor 17P had any effect on the studied pathways known to be
involved in uterine contractility or quiescence. In the cervix, neither VP nor
17P altered pathways demonstrated to be involved in cervical remodeling.
Administration of VP was noted to increase the expression of the antimicrobial
protein defensin 1. Whether this molecular change from VP results in a functional
effect and is a key mechanism by which VP prevents PTB requires further study.

Copyright © 2013 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3581865
PMID: 23433326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056664. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) induced by TNF-a requires
AKT/GSK-3ß-mediated stabilization of snail in colorectal cancer.

Wang H(1), Wang HS, Zhou BH, Li CL, Zhang F, Wang XF, Zhang G, Bu XZ, Cai SH, Du 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Chronic inflammation-promoted metastasis has been considered as a major challenge
in cancer therapy. Pro-inflammatory cytokine TNFa can induce cancer invasion and 
metastasis associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, the 
underlying mechanisms are not entirely clear. In this study, we showed that TNFa 
induces EMT in human HCT116 cells and thereby promotes colorectal cancer (CRC)
invasion and metastasis. TNFa-induced EMT was characterized by acquiring
mesenchymal spindle-like morphology and increasing the expression of N-cadherin
and fibronectin with a concomitant decrease of E-cadherin and Zona
occludin-1(ZO-1). TNFa treatment also increased the expression of transcription
factor Snail, but not Slug, ZEB1 and Twist. Overexpression of Snail induced a
switch from E-cadherin to N-cadherin expression in HCT116 cells, which is a
characteristic of EMT. Conversely, knockdown of Snail significantly attenuated
TNFa-induced EMT in HCT116 cells, suggesting that Snail plays a crucial role in
TNFa-induced EMT. Interestingly, exposure to TNFa rapidly increased Snail protein
expression and Snail nuclear localization but not mRNA level upregulation.
Finally, we demonstrated that TNFa elevated Snail stability by activating AKT
pathway and subsequently repressing GSK-3ß activity and decreasing the
association of Snail with GSK-3ß. Knockdown of GSK-3ß further verified our
finding. Taken together, these results revealed that AKT/GSK-3ß-mediated
stabilization of Snail is required for TNFa-induced EMT in CRC cells. Our study
provides a better understanding of inflammation-induced CRC metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3576347
PMID: 23431386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Histol Histopathol. 2013 Sep;28(9):1137-46. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Expression of claudins relates to tumour aggressivity, location and recurrence in
ependymomas.

Nordfors K(1), Haapasalo J, Sallinen PK, Haapasalo H, Soini Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Pirkanmaa Hospital
District, Tampere, Finland. kristiina.nordfors@gmail.com

The aim of our study was to assess the nature and importance of claudin
expression in grade I-III ependymomas. The expression of claudins 2-5, 7, 10,
TWIST, and ZEB1 were investigated in a series of 61 ependymomas using
immunohistochemistry. All the claudins were expressed in ependymomas, except for 
CLDN4. CLDN5 positive tumours were associated with higher grade (p=0.049),
whereas CLDN10 was lower in higher grade tumours (p=0.039). CLDN5 and CLDN3 were 
overexpressed in ependymomas of cerebral location (p=0.036, p=0.007,
respectively). CLDN5 positive tumours showed more nuclear atypia, endothelial
proliferation, mitosis, and hypercellularity (p=0.007, p=0.018, p=0.041, p=0.010,
respectively). CLDN5 positivity correlated to higher proliferation (p=0.015).
CLDN7 was more often positive in primary tumours (p=0.041). Positive ZEB1
expression was associated with CLDN2 negativity (p=0.031). TWIST-negative tumours
were more often also CLDN5 and 10 negative (p=0.013, p=0.017, respectively).
CLDN5 was related to more aggressive tumours compared to CLDN2 and 10, which
tended to display a better degree of differentiation and a better prognosis.
CLDN2 and CLDN5 were expressed commonly in ependymomas, while the parental
ependymal cells in the central nervous system were usually negative. Evidently,
claudins influence growth and differentiation in ependymomas.

PMID: 23423606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncol Lett. 2013 Feb;5(2):564-568. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

High expression of ZEB1 correlates with liver metastasis and poor prognosis in
colorectal cancer.

Zhang GJ(1), Zhou T, Tian HP, Liu ZL, Xia SS.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of General Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of North
Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong, Sichuan 637000, P.R. China.

Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) has been shown to promote invasion
and metastasis in several types of human cancer and to have a prognostic role in 
certain cancers. However, the clinical significance of ZEB1 in colorectal cancer 
(CRC) has not been sufficiently investigated. This study aimed to address this
issue. In this study, we compared the expression of ZEB1 between CRC tissues and 
normal adjacent mucosa using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. The association of
ZEB1 expression with clinicopathological characteristics was analyzed by
appropriate statistical analyses. Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional
hazards regression models were used to investigate the association of ZEB1
expression with survival of patients. The results showed that the relative
expression levels of ZEB1 were significantly higher in CRC tissues compared to
the normal adjacent mucosa and higher expression of ZEB1 correlated with liver
metastasis. Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that patients with high ZEB1 had a
poor overall survival. Moreover, the multivariate analysis showed that high
expression of ZEB1 was an independent predictor of overall survival. Our data
indicate the potential of ZEB1 as a novel prognostic biomarker for CRC.

PMCID: PMC3573155
PMID: 23420790  [PubMed]


110. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):81-90. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2442-0.
Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Vimentin, zeb1 and Sip1 are up-regulated in triple-negative and basal-like breast
cancers: association with an aggressive tumour phenotype.

Karihtala P(1), Auvinen P, Kauppila S, Haapasaari KM, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Soini
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Oulu University Hospital, PO Box 22, 
90029 Oulu, Finland. peeter.karihtala@oulu.fi

In epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) epithelial cancer cells achieve
mesenchymal features, essentially helping them to metastasize. There is some
evidence that EMT could be increased in triple-negative (TNBC) or basal-like
breast cancers, although more precise mechanisms considering e.g. EMT-regulating 
transcription factors are largely unknown. We assessed immunohistochemically
vimentin (separately in in situ areas and in invasive cells) as an indicator of
EMT, and also EMT-regulating transcription factors zeb1 (separately in stroma and
tumour) and Sip1 (in nuclei and cytoplasm) in histological samples of 231 women
with local or locally advanced invasive breast cancer. 51.1 % of patients had
TNBC and 48.9 % oestrogen and progesterone receptor-positive and HER2 negative
breast cancer. Basal-like breast cancers were defined as TNBC that also expressed
epidermal growth factor receptor EGFR and/or cytokeratin 5/6. Vimentin expression
in invasive cells was higher in TNBCs (p = 9 × 10(-12)) compared to non-TNBC
tumours. Vimentin (p = 2 × 10(-6)), nuclear Sip1 (p = 0.035) and zeb1 in stroma
(p = 0.013) were overexpressed in basal-like cancers compared to non-basal-like
TNBCs. In non-TNBC group findings between studied markers and clinicopathological
factors were rare. However, in TNBC cases, vimentin expression in invasive cells 
associated with poor differentiation (p = 0.00007), zeb1 expression in cancer
cells with higher grade (p = 0.002), vascular invasion (p = 0.036) and larger
T-class (p = 0.027), whereas stromal zeb1 associated with lymphatic vessel
invasion (p = 0.036) and vascular invasion (p = 0.039). High nuclear Sip1
expression was prognostic for poor disease-free survival (p = 0.002) in the whole
cohort. The current results emphasize the increased role of EMT in TNBC and
especially in basal-like breast cancers. These observations also support the role
of studied parameters in tumour progression.

PMID: 23412770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 May 15;304(10):F1266-73. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00302.2012. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

MiRNA-200b represses transforming growth factor-ß1-induced EMT and fibronectin
expression in kidney proximal tubular cells.

Tang O(1), Chen XM, Shen S, Hahn M, Pollock CA.

Author information: 
(1)Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Royal North Shore Hospital and
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) comprise of a novel class of endogenous small noncoding RNAs
that frequently downregulate the expression of target genes. Recent reports
suggest that miRNA-200b prevents epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
cancer cells by targeting the E-box binding transcription factors Zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2). 
About 35% of active fibroblasts are derived from EMT which is central to the
development of progressive renal fibrosis. Hence, this study was designed to
assess the effect of miRNA-200b on transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß1)-induced 
fibrotic responses in renal tubular cells. Morphologically, human kidney-2 cells 
transfected with miRNA-200b retained their epithelial cell characteristics when
exposed to TGF-ß1. miRNA-200b significantly increased E-cadherin (P < 0.001) and 
reduced fibronectin mRNA and protein expression (both P < 0.01) independent of
phospho-Smad2/3 and phospho-p38 and p42/44 signaling. Increased E-cadherin
expression was associated with decreased expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 and
repression of fibronectin was mediated through direct targeting of the
fibronectin mRNA, demonstrated using pMIR luciferase reporter assay and
site-directed mutagenesis. These results suggest that miRNA-200b suppresses
TGF-ß1-induced EMT via inhibition of ZEB1 and ZEB2 and the extracellular matrix
protein fibronectin by directing targeting of its 3'UTR mRNA, independent of
pathways directly involved in TGF-ß1 signaling.

PMID: 23408168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Clin Exp Optom. 2013 Mar;96(2):146-54. doi: 10.1111/cxo.12024. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Insights into keratoconus from a genetic perspective.

Burdon KP(1), Vincent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.

Keratoconus is a progressive and non-inflammatory thinning of the cornea, which
may result in severe visual impairment due to irregular curvature and scarring.
It can occur in isolation but is often seen in association with other systemic or
ocular disorders. There is a well-recognised genetic component to keratoconus, as
evidenced by family and twin studies; however, the aetiology of the disease is
complex with both genetic and environmental factors playing a role. Over the last
decade significant progress has been made in identifying genetic risk factors for
keratoconus. Multiple approaches have been taken including candidate gene studies
and genome-wide studies. VSX1 remains as the best characterised keratoconus gene 
but only accounts for rare cases. Other candidate genes with a role to play
include SOD1, other corneal dystrophy genes such as ZEB1 and TGFBI and collagen
genes. Family-based studies have recently led to the identification of the MIR184
gene for keratoconus with cataract and to the DOCK9 gene in a family with
isolated keratoconus. Numerous other linkages have been reported and new
sequencing technologies are set to rapidly expand the number of identified
keratoconus genes in these regions. Similarly, recent genome-wide association
studies in case-controlled cohorts have identified common variations in and
around HGF, RAB3GAP1 and LOX as candidate risk factors for keratoconus. These
gene identifications are beginning to reveal the molecular aetiology of
keratoconus but despite this recent progress, there remain numerous genetic risk 
factors to be identified for this relatively common yet complex disease.

© 2013 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Optometry © 2013 Optometrists
Association Australia.

PMID: 23387289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Oncol Rep. 2013 Apr;29(4):1579-87. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2267. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Downregulated microRNA-200a promotes EMT and tumor growth through the
wnt/ß-catenin pathway by targeting the E-cadherin repressors ZEB1/ZEB2 in gastric
adenocarcinoma.

Cong N(1), Du P, Zhang A, Shen F, Su J, Pu P, Wang T, Zjang J, Kang C, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin 300052, PR China.

In a previous study, we found that microRNA (miRNA)-200a suppresses Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling by interacting with ß-catenin, thereby inhibiting migration, invasion
and proliferation. However, the mechanism involved in this suppression remains
unclear. In the present study, we investigated the underlying mechanism of
miR-200a regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in gastric
carcinoma cells, and confirmed the tumor suppressor role of miR-200a in vivo. The
expressions of miRNA-200a, -200b and -200c, identified by fluorescent in situ
hybridization, were downregulated and inversely correlated with WHO grades of
gastric adenocarcinoma (GA). The expression of the potential miR-200a target
genes ZEB1 and ZEB2 was detected immunohistochemically. These examinations used
the same tissue microarrays to analyze the relationships between miR-200a and
potential target genes. The expression of miR-200a and ZEB1/ZEB2 in the same GA
tissue microarrays was inversely related. Restored miR-200a expression inhibited 
tumor growth in nude mice harboring subcutaneous SGC7901 xenografts. The
expression of N-cadherin, ß-catenin, Twist1 and Snail2 decreased, and E-cadherin 
levels increased, when miR-200a was elevated, as tested by fluorescence
microscopy and immunohistochemistry. Similar results were observed in vivo. We
found upregulated miR-200a expression to increase E-cadherin and suppress the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2 in GA, thus delaying tumor
growth in vivo. The effect of miR-200a on Wnt/ß-catenin signaling may provide a
therapeutic target against EMT.

PMID: 23381389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054211. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

TAZ expression as a prognostic indicator in colorectal cancer.

Yuen HF(1), McCrudden CM, Huang YH, Tham JM, Zhang X, Zeng Q, Zhang SD, Hong W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (ASTAR), Singapore, Singapore.

The Hippo pathway restricts the activity of transcriptional coactivators TAZ
(WWTR1) and YAP. TAZ and YAP are reported to be overexpressed in various cancers,
however, their prognostic significance in colorectal cancers remains unstudied.
The expression levels of TAZ and YAP, and their downstream transcriptional
targets, AXL and CTGF, were extracted from two independent colon cancer patient
datasets available in the Gene Expression Omnibus database, totaling 522
patients. We found that mRNA expressions of both TAZ and YAP were positively
correlated with those of AXL and CTGF (p<0.05). High level mRNA expression of
TAZ, AXL or CTGF significantly correlated with shorter survival. Importantly,
patients co-overexpressing all 3 genes had a significantly shorter survival time,
and combinatorial expression of these 3 genes was an independent predictor for
survival. The downstream target genes for TAZ-AXL-CTGF overexpression were
identified by Java application MyStats. Interestingly, genes that are associated 
with colon cancer progression (ANTXR1, EFEMP2, SULF1, TAGLN, VCAN, ZEB1 and ZEB2)
were upregulated in patients co-overexpressing TAZ-AXL-CTGF. This TAZ-AXL-CTGF
gene expression signature (GES) was then applied to Connectivity Map to identify 
small molecules that could potentially be utilized to reverse this GES. Of the
top 20 small molecules identified by connectivity map, amiloride (a potassium
sparing diuretic), and tretinoin (all-trans retinoic acid) have shown therapeutic
promise in inhibition of colon cancer cell growth. Using MyStats, we found that
low level expression of either ANO1 or SQLE were associated with a better
prognosis in patients who co-overexpressed TAZ-AXL-CTGF, and that ANO1 was an
independent predictor of survival together with TAZ-AXL-CTGF. Finally, we
confirmed that TAZ regulates Axl, and plays an important role in clonogenicity
and non-adherent growth in vitro and tumor formation in vivo. These data suggest 
that TAZ could be a therapeutic target for the treatment of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC3553150
PMID: 23372686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar;19(3):325-33. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Genome-wide study of association and interaction with maternal cytomegalovirus
infection suggests new schizophrenia loci.

Børglum AD, Demontis D, Grove J, Pallesen J, Hollegaard MV, Pedersen CB, Hedemand
A, Mattheisen M; GROUP investigators10, Uitterlinden A, Nyegaard M, Ørntoft T,
Wiuf C, Didriksen M, Nordentoft M, Nöthen MM, Rietschel M, Ophoff RA, Cichon S,
Yolken RH, Hougaard DM, Mortensen PB, Mors O.

Collaborators: Kahn RS, Linszen DH, van Os J, DurkbWiersma, Bruggeman R, Cahn W, 
de Haan L, Krabbendam L, Myin-Germeys I.

Genetic and environmental components as well as their interaction contribute to
the risk of schizophrenia, making it highly relevant to include environmental
factors in genetic studies of schizophrenia. This study comprises genome-wide
association (GWA) and follow-up analyses of all individuals born in Denmark since
1981 and diagnosed with schizophrenia as well as controls from the same birth
cohort. Furthermore, we present the first genome-wide interaction survey of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and maternal cytomegalovirus (CMV)
infection. The GWA analysis included 888 cases and 882 controls, and the
follow-up investigation of the top GWA results was performed in independent
Danish (1396 cases and 1803 controls) and German-Dutch (1169 cases, 3714
controls) samples. The SNPs most strongly associated in the single-marker
analysis of the combined Danish samples were rs4757144 in ARNTL (P=3.78 × 10(-6))
and rs8057927 in CDH13 (P=1.39 × 10(-5)). Both genes have previously been linked 
to schizophrenia or other psychiatric disorders. The strongest associated SNP in 
the combined analysis, including Danish and German-Dutch samples, was rs12922317 
in RUNDC2A (P=9.04 × 10(-7)). A region-based analysis summarizing independent
signals in segments of 100<U+2009>kb identified a new region-based genome-wide
significant locus overlapping the gene ZEB1 (P=7.0 × 10(-7)). This signal was
replicated in the follow-up analysis (P=2.3 × 10(-2)). Significant interaction
with maternal CMV infection was found for rs7902091 (P(SNP × CMV)=7.3 × 10(-7))
in CTNNA3, a gene not previously implicated in schizophrenia, stressing the
importance of including environmental factors in genetic studies.

PMCID: PMC3932405
PMID: 23358160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cancer Med. 2012 Oct;1(2):141-55. doi: 10.1002/cam4.29. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

MicroRNA-142 is mutated in about 20% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Kwanhian W(1), Lenze D, Alles J, Motsch N, Barth S, Döll C, Imig J, Hummel M,
Tinguely M, Trivedi P, Lulitanond V, Meister G, Renner C, Grässer FA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Saarland University Medical School 66421, Homburg,
Germany; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University
40002, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short 18-23 nucleotide long noncoding RNAs that
posttranscriptionally regulate gene expression by binding to mRNA. Our previous
miRNA profiling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) revealed a mutation in
the seed sequence of miR-142-3p. Further analysis now showed that miR-142 was
mutated in 11 (19.64%) of the 56 DLBCL cases. Of these, one case had a mutation
in both alleles, with the remainder being heterozygous. Four mutations were found
in the mature miR-142-5p, four in the mature miR-142-3p, and three mutations
affected the miR-142 precursor. Two mutations in the seed sequence redirected
miR-142-3p to the mRNA of the transcriptional repressor ZEB2 and one of them also
targeted the ZEB1 mRNA. However, the other mutations in the mature miR-142-3p did
not influence either the ZEB1 or ZEB2 3' untranslated region (3' UTR). On the
other hand, the mutations affecting the seed sequence of miR-142-3p resulted in a
loss of responsiveness in the 3' UTR of the known miR-142-3p targets RAC1 and
ADCY9. In contrast to the mouse p300 gene, the human p300 gene was not found to
be a target for miR-142-5p. In one case with a mutation of the precursor, we
observed aberrant processing of the miR-142-5p. Our data suggest that the
mutations in miR-142 probably lead to a loss rather than a gain of function. This
is the first report describing mutations of a miRNA gene in a large percentage of
a distinct lymphoma subtype.

PMCID: PMC3544448
PMID: 23342264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 1;19(5):1071-82. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2675.
Epub 2013 Jan 22.

ZEB1 Promotes invasiveness of colorectal carcinoma cells through the opposing
regulation of uPA and PAI-1.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), de Barrios O, Siles L, Amendola PG, Darling DS, Cuatrecasas
M, Castells A, Postigo A.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology
and Hematology, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: Carcinoma cells enhance their invasive capacity through
dedifferentiation and dissolution of intercellular adhesions. A key activator of 
this process is the ZEB1 transcription factor, which is induced in invading
cancer cells by canonical Wnt signaling (ß-catenin/TCF4). Tumor invasiveness also
entails proteolytic remodeling of the peritumoral stroma. This study aimed to
investigate the potential regulation by ZEB1 of the plasminogen proteolytic
system constituted by the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), and its
inhibitor, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Through multiple experimental approaches, colorectal
carcinoma (CRC) cell lines and samples from human primary CRC and ZEB1 (-/-) mice
were used to examine ZEB1-mediated regulation of uPA and PAI-1 at the protein,
mRNA, and transcriptional level.
RESULTS: ZEB1 regulates uPA and PAI-1 in opposite directions: induces uPA and
inhibits PAI-1. In vivo expression of uPA depends on ZEB1 as it is severely
reduced in the developing intestine of ZEB1 null (-/-) mice. Optimal induction of
uPA by Wnt signaling requires ZEB1 expression. ZEB1 binds to the uPA promoter and
activates its transcription through a mechanism implicating the histone
acetyltransferase p300. In contrast, inhibition of PAI-1 by ZEB1 does not involve
transcriptional repression but rather downregulation of mRNA stability.
ZEB1-mediated tumor cell migration and invasion depend on its induction of uPA.
ZEB1 coexpresses with uPA in cancer cells at the invasive front of CRCs.
CONCLUSIONS: ZEB1 promotes tumor invasiveness not only via induction in cancer
cells of a motile dedifferentiated phenotype but also by differential regulation 
of genes involved in stroma remodeling.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23340304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;33(7):1368-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01259-12. Epub 2013 Jan
22.

ZEB1 imposes a temporary stage-dependent inhibition of muscle gene expression and
differentiation via CtBP-mediated transcriptional repression.

Siles L(1), Sánchez-Tilló E, Lim JW, Darling DS, Kroll KL, Postigo A.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, IDIBAPS, Barcelona,
Spain.

Skeletal muscle development is orchestrated by the myogenic regulatory factor
MyoD, whose activity is blocked in myoblasts by proteins preventing its nuclear
translocation and/or binding to G/C-centered E-boxes in target genes. Recent
evidence indicates that muscle gene expression is also regulated at the cis level
by differential affinity for DNA between MyoD and other E-box binding proteins
during myogenesis. MyoD binds to G/C-centered E-boxes, enriched in muscle
differentiation genes, in myotubes but not in myoblasts. Here, we used cell-based
and in vivo Drosophila, Xenopus laevis, and mouse models to show that ZEB1, a
G/C-centered E-box binding transcriptional repressor, imposes a temporary
stage-dependent inhibition of muscle gene expression and differentiation via
CtBP-mediated transcriptional repression. We found that, contrary to MyoD, ZEB1
binds to G/C-centered E-boxes in muscle differentiation genes at the myoblast
stage but not in myotubes. Its knockdown results in precocious expression of
muscle differentiation genes and acceleration of myotube formation. Inhibition of
muscle genes by ZEB1 occurs via transcriptional repression and involves
recruitment of the CtBP corepressor. Lastly, we show that the pattern of gene
expression associated with muscle differentiation is accelerated in ZEB1(-/-)
mouse embryos. These results set ZEB1 as an important regulator of the temporal
pattern of gene expression controlling muscle differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3624276
PMID: 23339872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2013 Jan 16;13:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-13-4.

Integrative pathway dissection of molecular mechanisms of moxLDL-induced vascular
smooth muscle phenotype transformation.

Karagiannis GS(1), Weile J, Bader GD, Minta J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis (AT) is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized 
by the accumulation of inflammatory cells, lipoproteins and fibrous tissue in the
walls of arteries. AT is the primary cause of heart attacks and stroke and is the
leading cause of death in Western countries. To date, the pathogenesis of AT is
not well-defined. Studies have shown that the dedifferentiation of contractile
and quiescent vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) to the proliferative, migratory 
and synthetic phenotype in the intima is pivotal for the onset and progression of
AT. To further delineate the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of AT, we
analyzed the early molecular pathways and networks involved in the SMC phenotype 
transformation.
METHODS: Quiescent human coronary artery SMCs were treated with
minimally-oxidized LDL (moxLDL), for 3 hours and 21 hours, respectively.
Transcriptomic data was generated for both time-points using microarrays and was 
subjected to pathway analysis using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, GeneMANIA and
Ingenuity software tools. Gene expression heat maps and pathways enriched in
differentially expressed genes were compared to identify functional biological
themes to elucidate early and late molecular mechanisms of moxLDL-induced SMC
dedifferentiation.
RESULTS: Differentially expressed genes were found to be enriched in cholesterol 
biosynthesis, inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, cell cycle
control and myogenic contraction themes. These pathways are consistent with
inflammatory responses, cell proliferation, migration and ECM production, which
are characteristic of SMC dedifferentiation. Furthermore, up-regulation of
cholesterol synthesis and dysregulation of cholesterol metabolism was observed in
moxLDL-induced SMC. These observations are consistent with the accumulation of
cholesterol and oxidized cholesterol esters, which induce proinflammatory
reactions during atherogenesis. Our data implicate for the first time IL12,
IFN-a, HGF, CSF3, and VEGF signaling in SMC phenotype transformation. GPCR
signaling, HBP1 (repressor of cyclin D1 and CDKN1B), and ID2 and ZEB1
transcriptional regulators were also found to have important roles in SMC
dedifferentiation. Several microRNAs were observed to regulate the SMC phenotype 
transformation via an interaction with IFN-<U+03B3> pathway. Also, several "nexus" genes
in complex networks, including components of the multi-subunit enzyme complex
involved in the terminal stages of cholesterol synthesis, microRNAs (miR-203,
miR-511, miR-590-3p, miR-346*/miR- 1207-5p/miR-4763-3p), GPCR proteins (GPR1,
GPR64, GPRC5A, GPR171, GPR176, GPR32, GPR25, GPR124) and signal transduction
pathways, were found to be regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: The systems biology analysis of the in vitro model of moxLDL-induced
VSMC phenotype transformation was associated with the regulation of several genes
not previously implicated in SMC phenotype transformation. The identification of 
these potential candidate genes enable hypothesis generation and in vivo
functional experimentation (such as gain and loss-of-function studies) to
establish causality with the process of SMC phenotype transformation and
atherogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3556327
PMID: 23324130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 9;33(2):203-11. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.565. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

WASF3 regulates miR-200 inactivation by ZEB1 through suppression of KISS1 leading
to increased invasiveness in breast cancer cells.

Teng Y(1), Mei Y(1), Hawthorn L(1), Cowell JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Georgia Health Sciences University, Cancer Center, Augusta, GA, USA.

The WASF3 gene promotes invasion and metastasis in breast cancer cells, which
have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition (EMT). Overexpression of WASF3
in cells that do not show EMT increases their invasion potential as a result of
increased ZEB1/2 levels, which specifically suppress the anti-invasion chromosome
1 miR-200a/200b/429 cluster. ZEB1/2 upregulation by WASF3 results from
downregulation of KISS1, leading to the release of inhibition of nuclear factor
(NF)<U+03BA>B by I<U+03BA>Ba. We further show that ZEB1 expression is regulated by the NF<U+03BA>B
transcription factor. Knockdown of WASF3 in breast cancer cells leads to reduced 
ZEB1 levels and increased miR-200 and E-cadherin levels, resulting in loss of
invasion potential. The central regulation of this interactive pathway by WASF3
accounts for the increased invasion associated with increased WASF3 expression
seen in aggressive breast cancer cells. WASF3, therefore, is a potential target
to suppress invasion and metastasis in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3998093
PMID: 23318438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Oncogene. 2013 Nov 7;32(45):5272-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.573. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Stat3-coordinated Lin-28-let-7-HMGA2 and miR-200-ZEB1 circuits initiate and
maintain oncostatin M-driven epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Guo L(1), Chen C, Shi M, Wang F, Chen X, Diao D, Hu M, Yu M, Qian L, Guo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Beijing Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China.

Inflammation can act as a crucial mediator of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). In this study, we show that oncostatin M (OSM) is expressed in 
an autocrine/paracrine fashion in invasive breast carcinoma. OSM stimulation
promotes spontaneous lung metastasis of MCF-7 xenografts in nude mice. A
conspicuous epigenetic transition was induced by OSM stimulation not only in
breast cancer cell lines but also in MCF-7 xenografts in nude mice. The
expression of miR-200 and let-7 family members in response to OSM stimulation was
downregulated in a signal transducer and activator of transcription factor 3
(Stat3)-dependent manner, resulting in comprehensive alterations of the
transcription factors and oncoproteins targeted by these microRNAs. Inhibition of
Stat3 activation or the ectopic expression of let-7 and miR-200 effectively
reversed the mesenchymal phenotype of breast cancer cells. Stat3 promotes the
transcription of Lin-28 by directly binding to the Lin-28 promoter, resulting in 
the repression of let-7 expression and concomitant upregulation of the let-7
target, high-mobility group A protein 2 (HMGA2). Knock down of HMGA2
significantly impairs OSM-driven EMT. Our data indicate that downregulation of
let-7 and miR-200 levels initiates and maintains OSM-induced EMT phenotypes, and 
HMGA2 acts as a master switch of OSM-induced EMT. These findings highlight the
importance of Stat3-coordinated Lin-28B-let-7-HMGA2 and miR-200-ZEB1 circuits in 
the cytokine-mediated phenotypic reprogramming of breast cancer cells.

PMID: 23318420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. EMBO J. 2013 Jan 23;32(2):231-44. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.336. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Foxm1 transcription factor is required for lung fibrosis and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Balli D(1), Ustiyan V, Zhang Y, Wang IC, Masino AJ, Ren X, Whitsett JA,
Kalinichenko VV, Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary Biology, The Perinatal
Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) participate in the pathogenesis of pulmonary
fibrosis, producing pro-inflammatory mediators and undergoing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Herein, we demonstrated the critical 
role of Forkhead Box M1 (Foxm1) transcription factor in radiation-induced
pulmonary fibrosis. Foxm1 was induced in AECs following lung irradiation.
Transgenic expression of an activated Foxm1 transcript in AECs enhanced
radiation-induced pneumonitis and pulmonary fibrosis, and increased the
expression of IL-1ß, Ccl2, Cxcl5, Snail1, Zeb1, Zeb2 and Foxf1. Conditional
deletion of Foxm1 from respiratory epithelial cells decreased radiation-induced
pulmonary fibrosis and prevented the increase in EMT-associated gene expression. 
siRNA-mediated inhibition of Foxm1 prevented TGF-ß-induced EMT in vitro. Foxm1
bound to and increased promoter activity of the Snail1 gene, a critical
transcriptional regulator of EMT. Expression of Snail1 restored TGF-ß-induced
loss of E-cadherin in Foxm1-deficient cells in vitro. Lineage-tracing studies
demonstrated that Foxm1 increased EMT during radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis
in vivo. Foxm1 is required for radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis by enhancing 
the expression of genes critical for lung inflammation and EMT.

PMCID: PMC3553386
PMID: 23288041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52380. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052380. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

dEF1 down-regulates ER-a expression and confers tamoxifen resistance in breast
cancer.

Guo S(1), Li Y, Tong Q, Gu F, Zhu T, Fu L, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Nankai University, Tianjin, China.

Resistance to tamoxifen therapy represents a major barrier to the successful
treatment of breast cancer, where a loss of or reduced ER-a level is considered a
primary mechanism. Understanding how ER-a expression is regulated would provide
insights into new intervention points to overcome tamoxifen resistance. In this
study, we report that the expression of dEF1 is up-regulated by 17ß-estradiol
(E2) in MCF-7 cells in an ER-a-dependent manner, through either PI3K or NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway. Ectopic expression of dEF1 in turn repressed ER-a transcription by
binding to the E(2)-box on the ER-a promoter. At the tissue level of breast
cancer, there is a strong and inverse correlation between the expression levels
of dEF1 and ER-a. In MCF-7 cells, an elevated expression of dEF1 made the cells
less sensitive to tamoxifen treatment, whereas overexpression of ER-a compromised
the effects of dEF1 and restored the sensitivity. Also, depletion of dEF1 by RNA 
interference in MDA-MB-231 cells restored the expression of ER-a and tamoxifen
sensitivity. In conclusion, we have identified an important role of dEF1 in the
development of tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer. Inhibiting dEF1 to restore 
ER-a expression might represent a potential therapeutic strategy for overcoming
endocrine resistance in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3528679
PMID: 23285017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Stem Cells. 2013 Apr;31(4):682-92. doi: 10.1002/stem.1307.

A PRC2-dependent repressive role of PRDM14 in human embryonic stem cells and
induced pluripotent stem cell reprogramming.

Chan YS(1), Göke J, Lu X, Venkatesan N, Feng B, Su IH, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

PRDM14 is an important determinant of the human embryonic stem cell (ESC)
identity and works in concert with the core ESC regulators to activate
pluripotency-associated genes. PRDM14 has been previously reported to exhibit
repressive activity in mouse ESCs and primordial germ cells; and while PRDM14 has
been implicated to suppress differentiation genes in human ESCs, the exact
mechanism of this repressive activity remains unknown. In this study, we provide 
evidence that PRDM14 is a direct repressor of developmental genes in human ESCs. 
PRDM14 binds to silenced genes in human ESCs and its global binding profile is
enriched for the repressive trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3)
modification. Further investigation reveals that PRDM14 interacts directly with
the chromatin regulator polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and PRC2 binding is 
detected at PRDM14-bound loci in human ESCs. Depletion of PRDM14 reduces PRC2
binding at these loci and the concomitant reduction of H3K27me3 modification.
Using reporter assays, we demonstrate that gene loci bound by PRDM14 exhibit
repressive activity that is dependent on both PRDM14 and PRC2. In reprogramming
human fibroblasts into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), ectopically
expressed PRDM14 can repress these developmental genes in fibroblasts. In
addition, we show that PRDM14 recruits PRC2 to repress a key mesenchymal gene
ZEB1, which enhances mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in the initiation event
of iPSC reprogramming. In summary, our study reveals a repressive role of PRDM14 
in the maintenance and induction of pluripotency and identifies PRDM14 as a new
regulator of PRC2.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23280602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biosens Bioelectron. 2013 May 15;43:50-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2012.11.012. Epub
2012 Nov 27.

Multiplexed specific label-free detection of NCI-H358 lung cancer cell line
lysates with silicon based photonic crystal microcavity biosensors.

Chakravarty S(1), Lai WC, Zou Y, Drabkin HA, Gemmill RM, Simon GR, Chin SH, Chen 
RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at
Austin, 10100 Burnet Road, Bldg 160, Austin, TX 78758, USA.
swapnajit.chakravarty@omegaoptics.com

We experimentally demonstrate label-free photonic crystal (PC) microcavity
biosensors in silicon-on-insulator (SOI) to detect the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) transcription factor, ZEB1, in minute volumes of sample.
Multiplexed specific detection of ZEB1 in lysates from NCI-H358 lung cancer cells
down to an estimated concentration of 2 cells per micro-liter is demonstrated.
L13 photonic crystal microcavities, coupled to W1 photonic crystal waveguides,
are employed in which resonances show high Q in the bio-ambient phosphate
buffered saline (PBS). When the sensor surface is derivatized with a specific
antibody, the binding of the corresponding antigen from a complex whole-cell
lysate generates a change in refractive index in the vicinity of the photonic
crystal microcavity, leading to a change in the resonance wavelength of the
resonance modes of the photonic crystal microcavity. The shift in the resonance
wavelength reveals the presence of the antigen. The sensor cavity has a surface
area of ~11µm(2). Multiplexed sensors permit simultaneous detection of many
binding interactions with specific immobilized antibodies from the same
bio-sample at the same instant of time. Specificity was demonstrated using a
sandwich assay which further amplifies the detection sensitivity at low
concentrations. The device represents a proof-of-concept demonstration of
label-free, high throughput, multiplexed detection of cancer cells with
specificity and sensitivity on a silicon chip platform.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3594323
PMID: 23274197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051688. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Regulation of trabecular meshwork cell contraction and intraocular pressure by
miR-200c.

Luna C(1), Li G, Huang J, Qiu J, Wu J, Yuan F, Epstein DL, Gonzalez P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, United
States of America.

Lowering intraocular pressure (IOP) delays or prevents the loss of vision in
primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) patients with high IOP and in those with
normal tension glaucoma showing progression. Abundant evidence demonstrates that 
inhibition of contractile machinery of the trabecular meshwork cells is an
effective method to lower IOP. However, the mechanisms involved in the regulation
of trabecular contraction are not well understood. Although microRNAs have been
shown to play important roles in the regulation of multiple cellular functions,
little is known about their potential involvement in the regulation of IOP. Here,
we showed that miR-200c is a direct postranscriptional inhibitor of genes
relevant to the physiologic regulation of TM cell contraction including the
validated targets Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 and 2 (ZEB1 and ZEB2), and
formin homology 2 domain containing 1 (FHOD1), as well as three novel targets:
lysophosphatidic acid receptor 1 (LPAR1/EDG2), endothelin A receptor (ETAR), and 
RhoA kinase (RHOA). Consistently, transfection of TM cells with miR-200c resulted
in strong inhibition of contraction in collagen populated gels as well as
decreased cell traction forces exerted by individual TM cells. Finally, delivery 
of miR-200c to the anterior chamber of living rat eyes resulted in a significant 
decrease in IOP, while inhibition of miR-200c using an adenoviral vector
expressing a molecular sponge led to a significant increase in IOP. These results
demonstrate for the first time the ability of a miRNA to regulate trabecular
contraction and modulate IOP in vivo, making miR-200c a worthy candidate for
exploring ways to alter trabecular contractility with therapeutic purposes in
glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC3522713
PMID: 23272142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Lett. 2013 May 1;331(2):131-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.12.010. Epub
2012 Dec 23.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal(-like) transition as a relevant molecular event in
malignant gliomas.

Kahlert UD(1), Nikkhah G, Maciaczyk J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Neurosurgery, Section of Stereotactic Neurosurgery,
University Medical Center Freiburg, Germany.

Tumor dissemination and metastatic behavior account for the vast majority of
cancer associated mortality. Epithelial tumors achieve this progressive state via
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT); however, the importance of this
process in the neuroepithelial context is currently very controversially
discussed. The review describes the current research status concerning EMT-like
changes in malignant gliomas including the role of TWIST1, ZEB1/ZEB2 and
SNAIl1/SNAIl2 as inducers for cell-invasiveness in GBMs. Furthermore,
WNT/ß-catenin signaling with its key-component FRIZZLED4 activating an EMT-like
program in malignant gliomas and its relationship to the stem-like phenotype as
well as discoveries on micro-RNA-level regulating the EMT-like process are
discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23268331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dis Model Mech. 2013 May;6(3):632-42. doi: 10.1242/dmm.010595. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Olfactomedin-1 activity identifies a cell invasion checkpoint during
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in the chick embryonic heart.

Lencinas A(1), Chhun DC, Dan KP, Ross KD, Hoover EA, Antin PB, Runyan RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Endothelia in the atrioventricular (AV) canal of the developing heart undergo a
prototypical epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) to begin heart valve
formation. Using an in vitro invasion assay, an extracellular matrix protein,
Olfactomedin-1 (OLFM1), was found to increase mesenchymal cell numbers in AV
canals from embryonic chick hearts. Treatment with both anti-OLFM1 antibody and
siRNA targeting OLFM1 inhibits mesenchymal cell formation. OLFM1 does not alter
cell proliferation, migration or apoptosis. Dispersion, but lack of invasion in
the presence of inhibiting antibody, identifies a specific role for OLFM1 in cell
invasion during EMT. This role is conserved in other epithelia, as OLFM1
similarly enhances invasion by MDCK epithelial cells in a transwell assay.
Synergy is observed when TGFß2 and OLFM1 are added to MDCK cell cultures,
indicating that OLFM-1 activity is cooperative with TGFß. Inhibition of both
OLFM1 and TGFß in heart invasion assays shows a similar cooperative role during
development. To explore OLFM1 activity during EMT, representative EMT markers
were examined. Effects of OLFM1 protein and anti-OLFM1 on transcripts of
cell-cell adhesion molecules and the transcription factors Snail-1, Snail-2,
Twist1 and Sox-9 argue that OLFM1 does not initiate EMT. Rather, regulation of
transcripts of Zeb1 and Zeb2, secreted proteases and mesenchymal cell markers by 
both OLFM1 and anti-OLFM1 is consistent with regulation of the cell invasion step
of EMT. We conclude that OLFM1 is present and necessary during EMT in the
embryonic chick heart. Its role in cell invasion and mesenchymal cell gene
regulation suggests an invasion checkpoint in EMT where OLFM1 acts to promote
cell invasion into the three-dimensional matrix.

PMCID: PMC3634647
PMID: 23264563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Jun;114(6):1395-403. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24481.

Inhibition of ZEB1 reverses EMT and chemoresistance in docetaxel-resistant human 
lung adenocarcinoma cell line.

Ren J(1), Chen Y, Song H, Chen L, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing 210002, China.

Docetaxel has been used as one of the first-line chemotherapies in solid tumors
including advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, limited responses
to chemotherapy are observed in clinic and the molecular mechanisms have not been
fully understood. Emerging evidence suggests that epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) plays an important role in the processes of tumor metastasis as 
well as resistance towards anticancer agents. In this study, it was observed that
docetaxel-resistant human lung adenocarcinoma cell line (SPC-A1/DTX) was typical 
of mesenchymal phenotype. SPC-A1/DTX cell line has increased migratory and
invasive capacity both in vitro and in vivo. Among the master EMT-inducing
transcriptional factors, ZEB1 was found to be significantly increased in
SPC-A1/DTX cell line. ZEB1 knockdown with RNA interference could reverse the EMT 
phenotype and inhibit the migratory ability of SPC-A1/DTX cells. Furthermore,
inhibition of ZEB1 significantly enhanced the chemosensitivity of SPC-A1/DTX
cells to docetaxel in vitro and in vivo and ectopic expression of ZEB1 increased 
the chemoresistance of SPC-A1 cells to docetaxel. All these results provide
experimental evidence that ZEB1 might be an attractive target for the treatment
of human NSCLC.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23255418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 1;288(5):3275-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.408104. Epub 2012
Dec 13.

The p63 protein isoform <U+0394>Np63a inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
human bladder cancer cells: role of MIR-205.

Tran MN(1), Choi W, Wszolek MF, Navai N, Lee IL, Nitti G, Wen S, Flores ER,
Siefker-Radtke A, Czerniak B, Dinney C, Barton M, McConkey DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77054, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a physiological process that plays
important roles in tumor metastasis, "stemness," and drug resistance. EMT is
typically characterized by the loss of the epithelial marker E-cadherin and
increased expression of EMT-associated transcriptional repressors, including ZEB1
and ZEB2. The miR-200 family and miR-205 prevent EMT through suppression of
ZEB1/2. p53 has been implicated in the regulation of miR-200c, but the mechanisms
controlling miR-205 expression remain elusive. Here we report that the p53 family
member and p63 isoform, <U+0394>Np63a, promotes miR-205 transcription and controls EMT
in human bladder cancer cells. <U+0394>Np63a, E-cadherin and miR-205 were coexpressed in
a panel of bladder cancer cell lines (n = 28) and a cohort of primary bladder
tumors (n = 98). Stable knockdown of <U+0394>Np63a in the "epithelial" bladder cancer
cell line UM-UC6 decreased the expression of miR-205 and induced the expression
of ZEB1/2, effects that were reversed by expression of exogenous miR-205.
Conversely, overexpression of <U+0394>Np63a in the "mesenchymal" bladder cancer cell
line UM-UC3 induced miR-205 and suppressed ZEB1/2. <U+0394>Np63a knockdown reduced the
expression of the primary and mature forms of miR-205 and the miR-205 "host" gene
(miR-205HG) and decreased binding of RNA Pol II to the miR-205HG promoter,
inhibiting miR-205HG transcription. Finally, high miR-205 expression was
associated with adverse clinical outcomes in bladder cancer patients. Together,
our data demonstrate that <U+0394>Np63a-mediated expression of miR-205 contributes to
the regulation of EMT in bladder cancer cells and identify miR-205 as a molecular
marker of the lethal subset of human bladder cancers.

PMCID: PMC3561548
PMID: 23239884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:720768. doi: 10.1155/2012/720768. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and
pancreatic tumor cell lines: the role of neutrophils and neutrophil-derived
elastase.

Grosse-Steffen T(1), Giese T, Giese N, Longerich T, Schirmacher P, Hänsch GM,
Gaida MM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Immunologie, Universität Heidelberg, Germany.
t.grosse-steffen@web.de

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is frequently associated with fibrosis
and a prominent inflammatory infiltrate in the desmoplastic stroma. Moreover, in 
PDAC, an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is observed. To explore a
possible connection between the infiltrating cells, particularly the
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) and the tumor cell transition, biopsies of
patients with PDAC (n = 115) were analysed with regard to PMN infiltration and
nuclear expression of ß-catenin and of ZEB1, well-established indicators of EMT. 
In biopsies with a dense PMN infiltrate, a nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin and 
of ZEB1 was observed. To address the question whether PMN could induce EMT, they 
were isolated from healthy donors and were cocultivated with pancreatic tumor
cells grown as monolayers. Rapid dyshesion of the tumor cells was seen, most
likely due to an elastase-mediated degradation of E-cadherin. In parallel, the
transcription factor TWIST was upregulated, ß-catenin translocated into the
nucleus, ZEB1 appeared in the nucleus, and keratins were downregulated. EMT was
also induced when the tumor cells were grown under conditions preventing
attachment to the culture plates. Here, also in the absence of elastase,
E-cadherin was downmodulated. PMN as well as prevention of adhesion induced EMT
also in liver cancer cell line. In conclusion, PMN via elastase induce EMT in
vitro, most likely due to the loss of cell-to-cell contact. Because in pancreatic
cancers the transition to a mesenchymal phenotype coincides with the PMN
infiltrate, a contribution of the inflammatory response to the induction of EMT
and-by implication-to tumor progression is possible.

PMCID: PMC3514849
PMID: 23227088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cancer Lett. 2013 Mar 1;330(1):22-32. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.11.018. Epub
2012 Nov 28.

GANT-61 inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cell growth in vitro and in NOD/SCID/IL2R
gamma null mice xenograft.

Fu J(1), Rodova M, Roy SK, Sharma J, Singh KP, Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Multiple lines of evidence suggest that the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling
pathway is aberrantly reactivated in pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs). The
objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which
GANT-61 (Gli transcription factor inhibitor) regulates stem cell characteristics 
and tumor growth. Effects of GANT-61 on CSC's viability, spheroid formation,
apoptosis, DNA-binding and transcriptional activities, and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) were measured. Humanized NOD/SCID/IL2R gamma(null) mice were
used to examine the effects of GANT-61 on CSC's tumor growth. GANT-61 inhibited
cell viability, spheroid formation, and Gli-DNA binding and transcriptional
activities, and induced apoptosis by activation of caspase-3 and cleavage of
Poly-ADP ribose Polymerase (PARP). GANT-61 increased the expression of
TRAIL-R1/DR4, TRAIL-R2/DR5 and Fas, and decreased expression of PDGFRa and Bcl-2.
GANT-61 also suppressed EMT by up-regulating E-cadherin and inhibiting N-cadherin
and transcription factors Snail, Slug and Zeb1. In addition, GANT-61 inhibited
pluripotency maintaining factors Nanog, Oct4, Sox-2 and cMyc. Suppression of both
Gli1 plus Gli2 by shRNA mimicked the changes in cell viability, spheroid
formation, apoptosis and gene expression observed in GANT-61-treated pancreatic
CSCs. Furthermore, GANT-61 inhibited CSC tumor growth which was associated with
up-regulation of DR4 and DR5 expression, and suppression of Gli1, Gli2, Bcl-2,
CCND2 and Zeb1 expression in tumor tissues derived from NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice.
Our data highlight the importance of Shh pathway for self-renewal and metastasis 
of pancreatic CSCs, and also suggest Gli as a therapeutic target for pancreatic
cancer in eliminating CSCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4153855
PMID: 23200667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Jun;114(6):1286-93. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24464.

Acquisition of paclitaxel resistance is associated with a more aggressive and
invasive phenotype in prostate cancer.

Kim JJ(1), Yin B, Christudass CS, Terada N, Rajagopalan K, Fabry B, Lee DY,
Shiraishi T, Getzenberg RH, Veltri RW, An SS, Mooney SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Drug resistance is a major limitation to the successful treatment of advanced
prostate cancer (PCa). Patients who have metastatic, castration-resistant PCa
(mCRPC) are treated with chemotherapeutics. However, these standard therapy
modalities culminate in the development of resistance. We established paclitaxel 
resistance in a classic, androgen-insensitive mCRPC cell line (DU145) and, using 
a suite of molecular and biophysical methods, characterized the structural and
functional changes in vitro and in vivo that are associated with the development 
of drug resistance. After acquiring paclitaxel-resistance, cells exhibited an
abnormal nuclear morphology with extensive chromosomal content, an increase in
stiffness, and faster cytoskeletal remodeling dynamics. Compared with the
parental DU145, paclitaxel-resistant (DU145-TxR) cells became highly invasive and
motile in vitro, exercised greater cell traction forces, and formed larger and
rapidly growing tumors in mouse xenografts. Furthermore, DU145-TxR cells showed a
discrete loss of keratins but a distinct gain of ZEB1, Vimentin and Snail,
suggesting an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. These findings demonstrate,
for the first time, that paclitaxel resistance in PCa is associated with a
trans-differentiation of epithelial cell machinery that enables more aggressive
and invasive phenotype and portend new strategies for developing novel biomarkers
and effective treatment modalities for PCa patients.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4211414
PMID: 23192682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Histopathology. 2013 Jan;62(2):326-33. doi: 10.1111/his.12000. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Biological roles and prognostic values of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition-mediating transcription factors Twist, ZEB1 and Slug in diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma.

Lemma S(1), Karihtala P, Haapasaari KM, Jantunen E, Soini Y, Bloigu R, Pasanen
AK, Turpeenniemi-Hujanen T, Kuittinen O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu,
Finland. slemma@mail.student.oulu.fi

AIMS:   To evaluate the biological roles and prognostic significance of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-mediating transcription factors (TFs)
Twist, ZEB1 and Slug in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). EMT 
has been shown to enhance solid tumour metastasis, invasion, and proliferation.
METHODS AND RESULTS:   Expression of Twist, ZEB1 and Slug was evaluated
immunohistochemically in eight samples from reactive lymphoid tissues and in
diagnostic samples from 102 DLBCL patients treated with curative intent with
R-CHOP-type chemotherapy. ZEB1 and Slug expression correlated with adverse
disease presentation. However, cytoplasmic Slug expression was linked to a
favourable disease outcome, whereas nuclear expression of ZEB1 indicated an
adverse outcome.
CONCLUSIONS:   This study shows that an EMT-like process occurs in lymphomas. Of 
the TFs investigated, ZEB1 seems to be the main one associated with adverse
clinical presentation and clinical outcome. Surprisingly, Slug expression in
cytoplasm was linked to a favourable prognosis. Further studies are needed to
evaluate whether inhibition of ZEB1 could serve as a therapeutic target.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 23190132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49321. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049321. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Tissue transglutaminase constitutively activates HIF-1a promoter and nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B via a non-canonical pathway.

Kumar S(1), Mehta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Constitutive activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) has been linked with
carcinogenesis and cancer progression, including metastasis, chemoresistance, and
radiation resistance. However, the molecular mechanisms that result in
constitutive activation of NF-<U+03BA>B are poorly understood. Here we show that chronic
expression of the pro-inflammatory protein tissue transglutaminase (TG2)
reprograms the transcription regulatory network in epithelial cells via
constitutive activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. TG2-induced NF-<U+03BA>B binds the functional NF-<U+03BA>B
binding site in hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1a) promoter and results in its
increased expression at transcription and protein levels even under normoxic
conditions. TG2/NF-<U+03BA>B-induced HIF-1 was deemed essential for increased expression
of some transcription repressors, like Zeb1, Zeb2, Snail, and Twist. Unlike tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNFa), TG2 did not require I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) for NF-<U+03BA>B
activation. Our data suggest that TG2 binds with I<U+03BA>Ba and results in its rapid
degradation via a non-proteasomal pathway. Importantly, the catalytically
inactive (C277S) mutant form of TG2 was as effective as was wild-type TG2 in
activating NF-<U+03BA>B and inducing HIF-1 expression. We also found that TG2 interacted
with p65/RelA protein, both in the cytosolic and the nuclear compartment. The
TG2/p65(NF-<U+03BA>B) complex binds to the HIF-1 promoter and induced its
transcriptional regulation. Inhibition of TG2 or p65/RelA also inhibited the
HIF-1a expression and attenuated Zeb1, Zeb2, and Twist expression. To our
knowledge, these findings show for the first time a direct link between TG2,
NF-<U+03BA>B, and HIF-1a, demonstrating TG2's important role in cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3501523
PMID: 23185316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Feb;33(2):257-65. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300200. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Estrogen receptor-mediated regulation of microRNA inhibits proliferation of
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Zhao J(1), Imbrie GA, Baur WE, Iyer LK, Aronovitz MJ, Kershaw TB, Haselmann GM,
Lu Q, Karas RH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA
02111, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Estradiol (E2) regulates gene transcription by activating estrogen
receptor-a and estrogen receptor-ß. Many of the genes regulated by E2 via
estrogen receptors are repressed, yet the molecular mechanisms that mediate
E2-induced gene repression are currently unknown. We hypothesized that E2, acting
through estrogen receptors, regulates expression of microRNAs (miRs) leading to
repression of expression of specific target genes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we report that E2 significantly upregulates the
expression of 26 miRs and downregulates the expression of 6 miRs in mouse aorta. 
E2-mediated upregulation of one of these miRs, miR-203, was chosen for further
study. In cultured vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC), E2-mediated upregulation 
of miR-203 is mediated by estrogen receptor-a (but not estrogen receptor-ß) via
transcriptional upregulation of the primary miR. We demonstrate that the
transcription factors Zeb-1 and AP-1 play critical roles in mediating E2-induced 
upregulation of miR-203 transcription. We show further that miR-203 mediates
E2-induced repression of Abl1, and p63 protein abundance in VSMC. Finally,
knocking-down miR-203 abolishes E2-mediated inhibition of VSMC proliferation, and
overexpression of miR-203 inhibits cultured VSMC proliferation, but not vascular 
endothelial cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that E2 regulates expression of miRs in the
vasculature and support the estrogen receptors-dependent induction of miRs as a
mechanism for E2-mediated gene repression. Furthermore, our findings demonstrate 
that miR-203 contributes to E2-induced inhibition of VSMC proliferation and
highlight the potential of miR-203 as a therapeutic agent in the treatment of
proliferative cardiovascular diseases.

PMCID: PMC3780598
PMID: 23175673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Cancer. 2012 Nov 23;11:87. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-11-87.

IL-1ß promotes stemness and invasiveness of colon cancer cells through Zeb1
activation.

Li Y(1), Wang L, Pappan L, Galliher-Beckley A, Shi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.

BACKGROUND: IL-1ß is a pleiotropic pro-inflammatory cytokine and its
up-regulation is closely associated with various cancers including
gastrointestinal tumors. However, it remains unclear how IL-1ß may contribute to 
the initiation and development of these inflammation-associated cancers. Here we 
investigated the role of IL-1ß in colon cancer stem cell (CSC) development.
METHODS: Using self-renewal assay, soft-agar assay, invasion assay, real-time PCR
analysis, immunoblot assay and shRNA knockdown, we determined the effects of
IL-1ß on cancer stem cell development and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
in human primary colon cancer cells and colon cancer cell line HCT-116.
RESULTS: We found that IL-1ß can increase sphere-forming capability of colon
cancer cells in serum-free medium. IL-1ß-induced spheres displayed an
up-regulation of stemness factor genes (Bmi1 and Nestin) and increased drug
resistance, hallmarks of CSCs. Importantly, expression of EMT activator Zeb1 was 
increased in IL-1ß-induced spheres, indicating that there might be a close
association between EMT and IL-1ß-induced CSC self-renewal. Indeed, IL-1ß
treatment led to EMT of colon cancer cells with loss of E-cadherin, up-regulation
of Zeb1, and gain of the mesenchymal phenotype. Furthermore, shRNA-mediated
knockdown of Zeb1 in HCT-116 cells reversed IL-1ß-induced EMT and stem cell
formation.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that IL-1ß may promote colon tumor growth and
invasion through activation of CSC self-renewal and EMT, and Zeb1 plays a
critical role in these two processes. Thus, IL-1ß and Zeb1 might be new
therapeutic targets against colon cancer stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3532073
PMID: 23174018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncogene. 2013 Oct 10;32(41):4873-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.505. Epub 2012 Nov
19.

Claudin-1 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition through activation of the
c-Abl-ERK signaling pathway in human liver cells.

Suh Y(1), Yoon CH, Kim RK, Lim EJ, Oh YS, Hwang SG, An S, Yoon G, Gye MC, Yi JM, 
Kim MJ, Lee SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    Oncogene. 2013 Oct 10;32(41):4871-2.

Claudins (CLDNs) are a family of integral membrane proteins central to the
formation of tight junctions, structures that are involved in paracellular
transport and cellular growth and differentiation, and are critical for the
maintenance of cellular polarity. Recent studies have provided evidence that
CLDNs are aberrantly expressed in diverse types of human cancers, including
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). However, little is known about how CLDN
expression is involved in cancer progression. In this study, we show that CLDN1
has a causal role in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human liver
cells, and that the c-Abl-Ras-Raf-1-ERK1/2 signaling axis is critical for the
induction of malignant progression by CLDN1. Overexpression of CLDN1 induced
expression of the EMT-regulating transcription factors Slug and Zeb1, and thereby
led to repression of E-cadherin, ß-catenin expression, enhanced expression of
N-cadherin and Vimentin, a loss of cell adhesion, and increased cell motility in 
normal liver cells and HCC cells. In line with these findings, inhibition of
either c-Abl or ERK clearly attenuated CLDN1-induced EMT, as evidenced by a
reversal of N-cadherin and E-cadherin expression patterns, and restored normal
motility. Collectively, these results indicate that CLDN1 is necessary for the
induction of EMT in human liver cells, and that activation of the
c-Abl-Ras-Raf-1-ERK1/2 signaling pathway is required for CLDN1-induced
acquisition of the malignant phenotype. The present observations suggest that
CLDN1 could be exploited as a biomarker for liver cancer metastasis and might
provide a pivotal point for therapeutic intervention in HCC.

PMID: 23160379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Jun;24(6):1062-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.08.004. Epub
2012 Nov 13.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a novel target of sulforaphane via COX-2/MMP2,
9/Snail, ZEB1 and miR-200c/ZEB1 pathways in human bladder cancer cells.

Shan Y(1), Zhang L, Bao Y, Li B, He C, Gao M, Feng X, Xu W, Zhang X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, Heilongjiang 150090, China.

Metastasis and recurrence of bladder cancer are the main reasons for its poor
prognosis and high mortality rates. Because of its biological activity and high
metabolic accumulation in urine, sulforaphane, a phytochemical exclusively
occurring in cruciferous vegetables, has a powerful and specific potential for
preventing bladder cancer. In this paper, sulforaphane is shown to significantly 
suppress a variety of biochemical pathways including the attachment, invasion,
migration and chemotaxis motion in malignant transitional bladder cancer T24
cells. Transfection with cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) overexpression plasmid largely 
abolished inhibition of MMP2/9 expression as well as cell invasive capability by 
sulforaphane. Moreover, sulforaphane inhibited the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process which underlies tumor cell invasion and migration
mediated by E-cadherin induction through reducing transcriptional repressors,
such as ZEB1 and Snail. Under conditions of over-expression of COX-2 and/or
MMP2/9, sulforaphane was still able to induce E-cadherin or reduce Snail/ZEB1
expression, suggesting that additional pathways might be involved. Further
studies indicated that miR-200c played a role in the regulation of E-cadherin via
the ZEB1 repressor but not by the Snail repressor. In conclusion, the EMT and two
recognized signaling pathways (COX-2/MMP2,9/ ZEB1, Snail and miR-200c/ZEB1) are
all targets for sulforaphane. This study indicated that sulforaphane may possess 
therapeutic potential in preventing recurrence of human bladder cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 16;14(6):R148. doi: 10.1186/bcr3358.

ERbeta1 represses basal breast cancer epithelial to mesenchymal transition by
destabilizing EGFR.

Thomas C, Rajapaksa G, Nikolos F, Hao R, Katchy A, McCollum CW, Bondesson M,
Quinlan P, Thompson A, Krishnamurthy S, Esteva FJ, Gustafsson JÅ.

INTRODUCTION: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with the
basal-like breast cancer phenotypes. 60% of basal-like cancers have been shown to
express wild-type estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta1). However, it is still unclear 
whether the ERbeta expression is related to EMT, invasion and metastasis in
breast cancer. In the present study, we examined whether ERbeta1 through
regulating EMT can influence invasion and metastasis in basal-like cancers.
METHODS: Basal-like breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231 and Hs578T) in which ERbeta1 
was either overexpressed or downregulated were analyzed for their ability to
migrate and invade (wound-healing assay, matrigel-coated Transwell assay) as well
as for the expression of EMT markers and components of the EGFR pathway
(immunoblotting, RT-PCR). Coimmunoprecipitation and ubiquitylation assays were
employed to examine whether ERbeta1 alters EGFR protein degradation and the
interaction between EGFR and the ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl. The metastatic potential
of the ERbeta1-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells was evaluated in vivo in a zebrafish
xenotransplantation model and the correlation between ERbeta1 and E-cadherin
expression was examined in 208 clinical breast cancer specimens by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Here we show that ERbeta1 inhibits EMT and invasion in basal-like breast
cancer cells when they grow either in vitro or in vivo in zebrafish. The
inhibition of EMT correlates with an ERbeta1-mediated upregulation of
miR-200a/b/429 and the subsequent repression of ZEB1 and SIP1, which results in
increased expression of E-cadherin. The positive correlation of ERbeta1 and
E-cadherin expression was additionally observed in breast tumor samples.
Downregulation of the basal marker EGFR through stabilization of the ubiquitin
ligase c-Cbl complexes and subsequent ubiquitylation and degradation of the
activated receptor is involved in the ERbeta1-mediated repression of EMT and
induction of EGFR signaling abolished the ability of ERbeta1 to sustain the
epithelial phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the results of our study strengthen the association 
of ERbeta1 with the regulation of EMT and propose the receptor as a potential
crucial marker in predicting metastasis in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4053135
PMID: 23158001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. BMC Cancer. 2012 Nov 15;12:522. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-522.

Spatial morphological and molecular differences within solid tumors may
contribute to the failure of vascular disruptive agent treatments.

Nguyen L(1), Fifis T, Malcontenti-Wilson C, Chan LS, Costa PN, Nikfarjam M,
Muralidharan V, Christophi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Heidelberg,
Victoria 3084, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of solid tumors with vascular disrupting agent OXi4503
results in over 90% tumor destruction. However, a thin rim of viable cells
persists in the tumor periphery following treatment, contributing to subsequent
recurrence. This study investigates inherent differences in the microenvironment 
of the tumor periphery that contribute to treatment resistance.
METHODS: Using a murine colorectal liver metastases model, spatial morphological 
and molecular differences within the periphery and the center of the tumor that
may account for differences in resistance to OXi4503 treatment were investigated.
H&E staining and immunostaining were used to examine vessel maturity and
stability, hypoxia and HIF1a levels, accumulation of immune cells, expression of 
proangiogenic factors/receptors (VEGF, TGF-ß, b-FGF, and AT1R) and expression of 
EMT markers (ZEB1, vimentin, E-cadherin and ß-catenin) in the periphery and
center of established tumors. The effects of OXi4503 on tumor vessels and cell
kinetics were also investigated.
RESULTS: Significant differences were found between tumor periphery and central
regions, including association of the periphery with mature vessels, higher
accumulation of immune cells, increased growth factor expression, minimal levels 
of hypoxia and increased evidence of EMT. OXi4503 treatment resulted in collapse 
of vessels in the tumor center; however vasculature in the periphery remained
patent. Similarly, tumor apoptosis and proliferation were differentially
modulated between centre and periphery after treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The molecular and morphological differences between tumor periphery 
and center may account for the observed differential resistance to OXi4503
treatment and could provide targets for drug development to totally eliminate
metastases.

PMCID: PMC3583184
PMID: 23153292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046742. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Differing roles for TCF4 and COL8A2 in central corneal thickness and fuchs
endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Igo RP Jr(1), Kopplin LJ, Joseph P, Truitt B, Fondran J, Bardenstein D, Aldave
AJ, Croasdale CR, Price MO, Rosenwasser M, Lass JH, Iyengar SK; FECD Genetics
Multi-center Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is the most common late-onset,
vision-threatening corneal dystrophy in the United States, affecting about 4% of 
the population. Advanced FECD involves a thickening of the cornea from stromal
edema and changes in Descemet membrane. To understand the relationship between
FECD and central corneal thickness (CCT), we characterized common genetic
variation in COL8A2 and TCF4, genes previously implicated in CCT and/or FECD.
Other genes previously associated with FECD (PITX2, ZEB1, SLC4A11), and genes
only known to affect CCT (COL5A1, FOXO1, AVGR8, ZNF469) were also interrogated.
FECD probands, relatives and controls were recruited from 32 clinical sites; a
total of 532 cases and 204 controls were genotyped and tested for association of 
FECD case/control status, a 7-step FECD severity scale and CCT, adjusting for age
and sex. Association of FECD grade with TCF4 was highly significant (OR=<U+200A>6.01 at 
rs613872; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.8×10(-25)), and remained significant when adjusted for changes in
CCT (OR=<U+200A>4.84; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.2×10(-16)). Association of CCT with TCF4 was also
significant (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.1×10(-7)), but was abolished with adjustment for FECD grade
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.92). After adjusting for FECD grade, markers in other genes examined were 
modestly associated (p ~ 0.001) with FECD and/or CCT. Thus, common variants in
TCF4 appear to influence FECD directly, and CCT secondarily via FECD.
Additionally, changes in corneal thickness due to the effect of other loci may
modify disease severity, age-at-onset, or other biomechanical characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3479099
PMID: 23110055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Oncogene. 2013 Sep 12;32(37):4355-65. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.475. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

Efficient TGFß-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition depends on hyaluronan
synthase HAS2.

Porsch H(1), Bernert B, Mehic M, Theocharis AD, Heldin CH, Heldin P.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science for life Laboratory, Biomedical 
Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental program, which can be 
adopted by cancer cells to increase their migration and ability to form
metastases. Transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) is a well-studied inducer of EMT.
We demonstrate that TGFß potently stimulates hyaluronan synthesis via
upregulation of hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2) in NMuMG mammary epithelial cells.
This stimulatory effect requires the kinase active type I TGFß receptor and is
dependent on Smad signaling and activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase. Knockdown of HAS2 inhibited the TGFß-induced EMT by about 50%, as
determined by the phase contrast microscopy and immunostaining using the EMT
marker ZO-1. Furthermore, real-time PCR analysis of the EMT markers fibronectin, 
Snail1 and Zeb1 revealed decreased expressions upon HAS2 suppression, using
specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) for HAS2. Removal of the extracellular
hyaluronan by Streptomyces hyaluronidase or inhibiting the binding to its cell
surface receptor CD44 by blocking antibodies, did not inhibit TGFß-induced EMT.
Interestingly, HAS2 suppression completely abolished the TGFß-induced cell
migration, whereas CD44 knockdown did not. These observations suggest that
TGFß-dependent HAS2 expression, but not extracellular hyaluronan, has an
important regulatory role in TGFß-induced EMT.

PMCID: PMC3778714
PMID: 23108409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BJU Int. 2013 Jan;111(1):30-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2012.11551.x. Epub 2012
Oct 26.

Expression patterns of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers in localized
prostate cancer: significance in clinicopathological outcomes following radical
prostatectomy.

Behnsawy HM(1), Miyake H, Harada K, Fujisawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Comment in
    BJU Int. 2013 Jan;111(1):6-7.

OBJECTIVE: To analyse the expression patterns of multiple molecular markers
implicated in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in localized prostate
cancer (PC), in order to clarify the significance of these markers in patients
undergoing radical prostatectomy (RP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Expression levels of 13 EMT markers, namely E-cadherin,
N-cadherin, ß-catenin, <U+03B3>-catenin, fibronectin, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 2, 
MMP-9, Slug, Snail, Twist, vimentin, ZEB1 and ZEB2, in RP specimens from 197
consecutive patients with localized PC were evaluated by immunohistochemical
staining.
RESULTS: Of the 13 markers, expression levels of E-cadherin, Snail, Twist and
vimentin were closely associated with several conventional prognostic factors.
Univariate analysis identified these four EMT markers as significant predictors
for biochemical recurrence (BR), while serum prostate-specific antigen, Gleason
score, seminal vesicle invasion (SVI), surgical margin status (SMS) and tumour
volume were also significant. Of these significant factors, expression levels of 
Twist and vimentin, SVI and SMS appeared to be independently related to BR on
multivariate analysis. There were significant differences in BR-free survival
according to positive numbers of these four independent factors. That is, BR
occurred in four of 90 patients who were negative for risk factors (4.4%), 21 of 
83 positive for one or two risk factors (25.3%) and 19 of 24 positive for three
or four risk factors (79.2%).
CONCLUSION: Measurement of expression levels of potential EMT markers,
particularly Twist and vimentin, in RP specimens, in addition to conventional
prognostic parameters, would contribute to the accurate prediction of the
biochemical outcome in patients with localized PC following RP.

© 2012 The Authors BJU International © 2012 BJU International.

PMID: 23107154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 14;287(51):42695-707. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.387761. Epub
2012 Oct 26.

MicroRNAs in the imprinted DLK1-DIO3 region repress the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition by targeting the TWIST1 protein signaling network.

Haga CL(1), Phinney DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter,
Florida 33458, USA.

Development of metastatic disease accounts for the vast majority of
cancer-related deaths. Nevertheless, few treatments exist that are designed to
specifically inhibit processes that drive tumor metastasis. The imprinted
DLK1-DIO3 region contains tumor-suppressing miRNAs, but their identity and
function remain indeterminate. In this study we identify seven miRNAs in the
imprinted DLK1-DIO3 region that function cooperatively to repress the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, a critical step that drives tumor
metastasis, as well as proliferation of carcinoma cells. These seven miRNAs (miRs
300, 382, 494, 495, 539, 543, and 544) repress a signaling network comprising
TWIST1, BMI1, ZEB1/2, and miR-200 family miRNAs and silencing of the cluster,
which occurs via hypermethylation of upstream CpG islands in human ductal
carcinomas, confers morphological, molecular, and function changes consistent
with an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Moreover, ectopic expression of
miR-544 independently inhibited proliferation of numerous tumor cell lines by
inducing the ATM cell cycle checkpoint pathway. These results establish the
DLKI-DIO3 miRNA cluster as a critical checkpoint regulating tumor growth and
metastasis and implicate epigenetic modification of the cluster in driving tumor 
progression. These results also suggest that promoter methylation status and
miRNA expression levels represent new diagnostic tools and therapeutic targets to
predict and inhibit, respectively, tumor metastasis in carcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3522270
PMID: 23105110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Feb;40(2):949-56. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2136-4. Epub 2012
Oct 14.

Involvement of ZEB1 and E-cadherin in the invasion of lung squamous cell
carcinoma.

Zhang J(1), Lu C, Zhang J, Kang J, Cao C, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interventional Radiology, Shanghai 10th People's Hospital,
Tongji University, No. 301, Yanchang Road, Shanghai, 200072, China.
zhangjuntj@yeah.net

This study intended to investigate the expression of the ZEB1 and E-cadherin
proteins in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) tissues and to examine the
clinicopathological correlation between protein levels and LSCC. RT-PCR and
Western blot were used to examine the expression of ZEB1 and E-cadherin mRNAs and
proteins in LSCC tissues as well as in adjacent normal tissues, and then analyze 
the relationship between the clinicopathological characteristics and the
expression changes of ZEB1 and E-cadherin mRNAs in LSCC. In addition, RNAi was
used to knockdown the expression of the ZEB1 gene in Human HCC827 cells;
subsequently, changes in the invasive ability of the resultant cells were
studied. The positive rates of ZEB1 and E-cadherin mRNAs in LSCC tissues were
69.2 and 38.5 %, respectively. They differed significantly from the corresponding
positive rates in the adjacent normal lung tissues (15.4 and 80.8 %, p < 0.05).
There was a negative correlation between the protein levels of ZEB1 and
E-cadherin in LSCC tissues (r = -0.714, p < 0.001); in addition, it was found
that ZEB1 protein expression in LSCC tissues was significantly higher than that
in the neighboring normal lung tissues (p < 0.05), and its expression was also
significantly higher in patients with lymph node metastases and distant
metastases compared to those patients without metastatic disease (p < 0.05). On
the contrary, E-cadherin expression was significantly lower in LSCC tissues than 
that in the neighboring normal tissue (p < 0.05). It was lower in patients with
lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis compared to patients without
metastatic disease (p < 0.05). However, the expression of ZEB1 and E-cadherin was
independent of gender, age, tumor size, or tumor differentiation level
(p > 0.05). Transfection of ZEB1 siRNA into HCC827 cells significantly reduced
the ZEB1 protein level (p < 0.01) and significantly elevated E-cadherin levels
(p < 0.01). Moreover, significantly less ZEB1 siRNA-transfected cells migrated
through Transwell chambers in the LSCC tissue than that in the control groups
(untransfected or transfected with control siRNA, p < 0.01). The expression of
the ZEB1 gene in LSCC tissues is downregulated with the expression of E-cadherin.
On the other hand, the expression of siRNA against ZEB1 promotes E-cadherin
expression and suppresses the invasive ability conferred by E-cadherin. In
conclusion, our data suggested that overexpression of the ZEB1 gene is possibly
associated with the occurrence, development, invasion of LSCC.

PMID: 23065281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46391. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046391. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Hypoxia induces EMT in low and highly aggressive pancreatic tumor cells but only 
cells with cancer stem cell characteristics acquire pronounced migratory
potential.

Salnikov AV(1), Liu L, Platen M, Gladkich J, Salnikova O, Ryschich E, Mattern J, 
Moldenhauer G, Werner J, Schemmer P, Büchler MW, Herr I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular OncoSurgery Group, Department of General Surgery, University of
Heidelberg and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

Tumor hypoxia induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which induces
invasion and metastasis, and is linked to cancer stem cells (CSCs). Whether EMT
generates CSCs de novo, enhances migration of existing CSCs or both is unclear.
We examined patient tissue of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) along with
carcinomas of breast, lung, kidney, prostate and ovary. For in vitro studies,
five established PDA cell lines classified as less (CSC(low)) and highly
aggressive CSC-like cells (CSC(high)) were examined by single and double
immunofluorescence microscopy, wound-, transwell-, and time-lapse microscopy.
HIF-1a and Slug, as well as HIF-2a and CD133 were co-expressed pointing to a
putative co-existence of hypoxia, EMT and CSCs in vivo. CSC(high) cells exhibited
high basal expression of the mesenchymal Vimentin protein but low or absent
expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin, with the opposite result in
CSC(low) cells. Hypoxia triggered altering of cell morphology from an epithelial 
to a mesenchymal phenotype, which was more pronounced in CSC(high) cells.
Concomitantly, E-cadherin expression was reduced and expression of Vimentin,
Slug, Twist2 and Zeb1 enhanced. While hypoxia caused migration in all cell lines,
velocity along with the percentage of migrating, polarized and
pseudopodia-forming cells was significantly higher in CSC(high) cells. These data
indicate that hypoxia-induced EMT occurs in PDA and several other tumor entities.
However although hypoxia-induced EMT signaling occurs in all tumor cell
populations, only the stem-like cells acquire high migratory potential and thus
may be responsible for invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3458836
PMID: 23050024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045965. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

MiR-145 regulates epithelial to mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells by 
targeting Oct4.

Hu J(1), Guo H, Li H, Liu Y, Liu J, Chen L, Zhang J, Zhang N.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Medical University, Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences,
Tianjin, China.

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(5). doi:
10.1371/annotation/aaef10de-ee36-416f-93eb-959dfa3dc92e.

MiR-145 could regulate tumor growth, apoptosis, migration, and invasion. In our
present study, we investigated its role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Expression of miR-145 was decreased in breast tumor tissues at T3&4 stages
in comparison with those at T1&2. Over-expression of miR-145 mimics enhanced
protein levels of E-cadherin and dampened those of a-SMA and Fibronectin,
indicative of its inhibitory role in EMT occurrence. Mechanistic studies showed
that miR-145 mimics inhibited Oct4 expression and miR-145 inhibitor enhanced it. 
Over-expression of Oct4 reversed miR-145-regulated expression of EMT markers,
suggesting that Oct4 mediated the inhibitory effects of miR-145. MiR-145 could
inhibite the expression of Snail, ZEB1, and ZEB2, while over-expression of Oct4
rescued the effects. Furthermore, Oct-4 induced over-expression of transcription 
factor Snail, ZEB1 and ZEB2 was mediated by ß-catenin. Expression of Slug and
Twist were not altered by miR-145/Oct4. Taken together, our results have revealed
a novel role of miR-145 on EMT. It inhibits EMT by blocking the expression of
Oct4, and downstream transcriptional factors, Snail, ZEB1 and ZEB2.

PMCID: PMC3458807
PMID: 23049906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045684. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Evidence for phenotypic plasticity in aggressive triple-negative breast cancer:
human biology is recapitulated by a novel model system.

D'Amato NC(1), Ostrander JH, Bowie ML, Sistrunk C, Borowsky A, Cardiff RD, Bell
K, Young LJ, Simin K, Bachelder RE, Delrow J, Dawson A, Yee LD, Mrózek K, Clay
TM, Osada T, Seewaldt VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

Breast cancers with a basal-like gene signature are primarily triple-negative,
frequently metastatic, and carry a poor prognosis. Basal-like breast cancers are 
enriched for markers of breast cancer stem cells as well as markers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). While EMT is generally thought to be
important in the process of metastasis, in vivo evidence of EMT in human disease 
remains rare. Here we report a novel model of human triple-negative breast
cancer, the DKAT cell line, which was isolated from an aggressive,
treatment-resistant triple-negative breast cancer that demonstrated morphological
and biochemical evidence suggestive of phenotypic plasticity in the patient. The 
DKAT cell line displays a basal-like phenotype in vitro when cultured in
serum-free media, and undergoes phenotypic changes consistent with EMT/MET in
response to serum-containing media, a unique property among the breast cancer
cell lines we tested. This EMT is marked by increased expression of the
transcription factor Zeb1, and Zeb1 is required for the enhanced migratory
ability of DKAT cells in the mesenchymal state. DKAT cells also express
progenitor-cell markers, and single DKAT cells are able to generate tumorspheres 
containing both epithelial and mesenchymal cell types. In vivo, as few as ten
DKAT cells are capable of forming xenograft tumors which display a range of
epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes. The DKAT model provides a novel model to
study the molecular mechanisms regulating phenotypic plasticity and the
aggressive biology of triple-negative breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3458110
PMID: 23049838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 7;287(50):42180-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.417832. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutations promote a reversible ZEB1/microRNA
(miR)-200-dependent epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).

Grassian AR(1), Lin F, Barrett R, Liu Y, Jiang W, Korpal M, Astley H, Gitterman
D, Henley T, Howes R, Levell J, Korn JM, Pagliarini R.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA.

Mutations in the genes encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1/2) occur
in a variety of tumor types, resulting in production of the proposed
oncometabolite, 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG). How mutant IDH and 2-HG alter
signaling pathways to promote cancer, however, remains unclear. Additionally,
there exist relatively few cell lines with IDH mutations. To examine the effect
of endogenous IDH mutations and 2-HG, we created a panel of isogenic epithelial
cell lines with either wild-type IDH1/2 or clinically relevant IDH1/2 mutations. 
Differences were noted in the ability of IDH mutations to cause robust 2-HG
accumulation. IDH1/2 mutants that produce high levels of 2-HG cause an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenotype, characterized by changes 
in EMT-related gene expression and cellular morphology. 2-HG is sufficient to
recapitulate aspects of this phenotype in the absence of an IDH mutation. In the 
cells types examined, mutant IDH-induced EMT is dependent on up-regulation of the
transcription factor ZEB1 and down-regulation of the miR-200 family of microRNAs.
Furthermore, sustained knockdown of IDH1 in IDH1 R132H mutant cells is sufficient
to reverse many characteristics of EMT, demonstrating that continued expression
of mutant IDH is required to maintain this phenotype. These results suggest
mutant IDH proteins can reversibly deregulate discrete signaling pathways that
contribute to tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3516763
PMID: 23038259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. APMIS. 2013 Jan;121(1):1-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02931.x. Epub 2012 Jun
26.

Expression of snail, twist, and Zeb1 in malignant mesothelioma.

Merikallio H(1), Pääkkö P, Salmenkivi K, Kinnula V, Harju T, Soini Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Respiratory Research Unit, Clinical Research 
Center, Oulu University Hospital, Finland.

We examined 56 malignant mesotheliomas, 117 lung adenocarcinomas, and 34
metastatic lung adenocarcinomas with antibodies to transcription factors involved
in epitheliomesenchymal transition. The tumors were stained immunohistochemically
with antibodies zeb1, twist, and snail. Malignant mesotheliomas exhibited a
stronger expression of zeb1 and twist than lung adenocarcinomas (p < 0.001 for
both). Metastatic adenocarcinomas displayed a more frequent expression of zeb1
and twist (p < 0.001 for both) than lung adenocarcinomas. Patients with snail
positive mesotheliomas experienced a better survival (p = 0.046), whereas in lung
adenocarcinomas, this trait predicted worse survival (p = 0.024). Biphasic
mesotheliomas had a more frequent expression of snail or zeb1 than epithelioid
and sarcomatoid mesotheliomas as a group (p = 0.034 and p = 0.005, respectively).
E-cadherin was more commonly present in epithelioid mesotheliomas (p = 0.002).
Cases with snail positivity showed a significantly lower apoptotic index (p =
0.039). Malignant mesotheliomas display strong twist and zeb1 expression, which
may be an indication of transdifferentiation between the epithelioid and
sarcomatoid cell types with biphasic mesotheliomas representing tumors in active 
transition. Metastatic adenocarcinomas show a higher expression of zeb1 and twist
than primary lung tumors, confirming our previous findings and highlighting their
significance in the metastatic process. Snail expression is associated with poor 
prognosis in lung adenocarcinomas, but an opposite effect was seen in
mesothelioma, a fact which may be related to the different cellular origin of
epithelial and mesothelial cells.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 23030626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Dec;33(12):2558-67. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs285. Epub 2012
Oct 1.

Integrin-linked kinase as a target for ERG-mediated invasive properties in
prostate cancer models.

Becker-Santos DD(1), Guo Y, Ghaffari M, Vickers ED, Lehman M, Altamirano-Dimas M,
Oloumi A, Furukawa J, Sharma M, Wang Y, Dedhar S, Cox ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V5Z 1L3.

Approximately half of prostate cancers (PCa) carry TMPRSS2-ERG translocations;
however, the clinical impact of this genomic alteration remains enigmatic.
Expression of v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene like (avian) gene (ERG)
promotes prostatic epithelial dysplasia in transgenic mice and acquisition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) characteristics in human prostatic
epithelial cells (PrECs). To explore whether ERG-induced EMT in PrECs was
associated with therapeutically targetable transformation characteristics, we
established stable populations of BPH-1, PNT1B and RWPE-1 immortalized human PrEC
lines that constitutively express flag-tagged ERG3 (fERG). All fERG-expressing
populations exhibited characteristics of in vitro and in vivo transformation.
Microarray analysis revealed >2000 commonly dysregulated genes in the fERG-PrEC
lines. Functional analysis revealed evidence that fERG cells underwent EMT and
acquired invasive characteristics. The fERG-induced EMT transcript signature was 
exemplified by suppressed expression of E-cadherin and keratins 5, 8, 14 and 18; 
elevated expression of N-cadherin, N-cadherin 2 and vimentin, and of the EMT
transcriptional regulators Snail, Zeb1 and Zeb2, and lymphoid enhancer-binding
factor-1 (LEF-1). In BPH-1 and RWPE-1-fERG cells, fERG expression is correlated
with increased expression of integrin-linked kinase (ILK) and its downstream
effectors Snail and LEF-1. Interfering RNA suppression of ERG decreased
expression of ILK, Snail and LEF-1, whereas small interfering RNA suppression of 
ILK did not alter fERG expression. Interfering RNA suppression of ERG or ILK
impaired fERG-PrEC Matrigel invasion. Treating fERG-BPH-1 cells with the small
molecule ILK inhibitor, QLT-0267, resulted in dose-dependent suppression of Snail
and LEF-1 expression, Matrigel invasion and reversion of anchorage-independent
growth. These results suggest that ILK is a therapeutically targetable mediator
of ERG-induced EMT and transformation in PCa.

PMCID: PMC3510737
PMID: 23027626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45045. Epub 2012 Sep 14.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in
prostate cancer cells.

Kong D(1), Ahmad A, Bao B, Li Y, Banerjee S, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

Clinical experience of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) in patients with
solid tumors has been disappointing; however, the molecular mechanism of
treatment failure is not known. Therefore, we sought to investigate the molecular
mechanism of treatment failure of HDACIs in the present study. We found that
HDACIs Trichostatin A (TSA) and Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) could
induce epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype in prostate cancer
(PCa) cells, which was associated with changes in cellular morphology consistent 
with increased expression of transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2 and Slug, and
mesenchymal markers such as vimentin, N-cadherin and Fibronectin. CHIP assay
showed acetylation of histone 3 on proximal promoters of selected genes, which
was in part responsible for increased expression of EMT markers. Moreover, TSA
treatment led to further increase in the expression of Sox2 and Nanog in PCa
cells with EMT phenotype, which was associated with cancer stem-like cell (CSLC) 
characteristics consistent with increased cell motility. Our results suggest that
HDACIs alone would lead to tumor aggressiveness, and thus strategies for
reverting EMT-phenotype to mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) phenotype
or the reversal of CSLC characteristics prior to the use of HDACIs would be
beneficial to realize the value of HDACIs for the treatment of solid tumors
especially PCa.

PMCID: PMC3443231
PMID: 23024790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jan 28;328(2):198-206. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.09.017. Epub 
2012 Sep 27.

Cancer genetics and genomics of human FOX family genes.

Katoh M(1), Igarashi M, Fukuda H, Nakagama H, Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Forkhead-box (FOX) family proteins, involved in cell growth and differentiation
as well as embryogenesis and longevity, are DNA-binding proteins regulating
transcription and DNA repair. The focus of this review is on the mechanisms of
FOX-related human carcinogenesis. FOXA1 is overexpressed as a result of gene
amplification in lung cancer, esophageal cancer, ER-positive breast cancer and
anaplastic thyroid cancer and is point-mutated in prostate cancer. FOXA1
overexpression in breast cancer and prostate cancer is associated with good or
poor prognosis, respectively. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the
5'-UTR of the FOXE1 (TTF2) gene is associated with thyroid cancer risk. FOXF1
overexpression in breast cancer is associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). FOXM1 is overexpressed owing to gene amplification in
basal-type breast cancer and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and it is
transcriptionally upregulated owing to Hedgehog-GLI, hypoxia-HIF1a or YAP-TEAD
signaling activation. FOXM1 overexpression leads to malignant phenotypes by
directly upregulating CCNB1, AURKB, MYC and SKP2 and indirectly upregulating ZEB1
and ZEB2 via miR-200b downregulation. Tumor suppressor functions of FOXO
transcription factors are lost in cancer cells as a result of chromosomal
translocation, deletion, miRNA-mediated repression, AKT-mediated cytoplasmic
sequestration or ubiquitination-mediated proteasomal degradation. FOXP1 is
upregulated as a result of gene fusion or amplification in DLBCL and MALT
lymphoma and also repression of miRNAs, such as miR-1, miR-34a and miR-504. FOXP1
overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in DLBCL, gastric MALT lymphoma 
and hepatocellular carcinoma but with good prognosis in breast cancer. In
neuroblastoma, the entire coding region of the FOXR1 (FOXN5) gene is fused to the
MLL or the PAFAH1B gene owing to interstitial deletions. FOXR1 fusion genes
function as oncogenes that repress transcription of FOXO target genes.
Whole-genome sequencing data from tens of thousands of human cancers will uncover
the mutational landscape of FOX family genes themselves as well as FOX-binding
sites, which will be ultimately applied for cancer diagnostics, prognostics, and 
therapeutics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23022474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Aging Cell. 2012 Dec;11(6):1065-73. doi: 10.1111/acel.12008. Epub 2012 Oct 19.

Molecular events in matrix protein metabolism in the aging kidney.

Sataranatarajan K(1), Feliers D, Mariappan MM, Lee HJ, Lee MJ, Day RT,
Yalamanchili HB, Choudhury GG, Barnes JL, Van Remmen H, Richardson A, Kasinath
BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

We explored molecular events associated with aging-induced matrix changes in the 
kidney. C57BL6 mice were studied in youth, middle age, and old age. Albuminuria
and serum cystatin C level (an index of glomerular filtration) increased with
aging. Renal hypertrophy was evident in middle-aged and old mice and was
associated with glomerulomegaly and increase in mesangial fraction occupied by
extracellular matrix. Content of collagen types I and III and fibronectin was
increased with aging; increment in their mRNA varied with the phase of aging. The
content of ZEB1 and ZEB2, collagen type I transcription inhibitors, and their
binding to the collagen type Ia2 promoter by ChIP assay also showed
age-phase-specific changes. Lack of increase in mRNA and data from polysome assay
suggested decreased degradation as a potential mechanism for kidney collagen type
I accumulation in the middle-aged mice. These changes occurred with increment in 
TGFß mRNA and protein and activation of its SMAD3 pathway; SMAD3 binding to the
collagen type Ia2 promoter was also increased. TGFß-regulated microRNAs (miRs)
exhibited selective regulation. The renal cortical content of miR-21 and
miR-200c, but not miR-192, miR-200a, or miR-200b, was increased with aging.
Increased miR-21 and miR-200c contents were associated with reduced expression of
their targets, Sprouty-1 and ZEB2, respectively. These data show that aging is
associated with complex molecular events in the kidney that are already evident
in the middle age and progress to old age. Age-phase-specific regulation of
matrix protein synthesis occurs and involves matrix protein-specific
transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms.

© 2012 The Authors Aging Cell © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 23020145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Sci. 2013 Jan;104(1):48-54. doi: 10.1111/cas.12030. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

MiR-150 is associated with poor prognosis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
via targeting the EMT inducer ZEB1.

Yokobori T(1), Suzuki S, Tanaka N, Inose T, Sohda M, Sano A, Sakai M, Nakajima M,
Miyazaki T, Kato H, Kuwano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgical Science, Gunma University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. bori45@gunma-u.ac.jp

The association of microRNAs (miRs) with cancer progression has been established 
in many cancers including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). A public
microarray database showed that the expression of miR-150 was lower in ESCC than 
in normal esophageal mucosa. Here, we focused on ZEB1,
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT)-inducer, as a target gene of miR-150
based on in silico predictions. The purpose of this study was to clarify the
clinicopathological significance of miR-150 in ESCC, and to investigate miR-150's
EMT-regulatory ability. Quantitative RT-PCR was used to evaluate miR-150
expression in 108 curative resected ESCC samples to determine the
clinicopathological significance. Moreover, we examined the in vitro and in vivo 
function of miR-150 via degradation of ZEB1. MiR-150 expression was significantly
lower in cancer tissues compared to adjacent non-cancerous tissues (P < 0.001).
Low expression of miR-150 in ESCC contributed to malignant potential, such as
tumor depth, lymph node metastasis, lymphatic invasion, venous invasion, clinical
staging, and poor prognosis (P < 0.05). In vitro assays showed that
EMT-inducer-ZEB1 is a new direct target of miR-150. Moreover, miR-150 induced
MET-like changes in TE-8 cells through ZEB1 degradation (e.g., E-cadherin
expression, vimentin repression, epithelial morphology, and suppression of
migration ability), and significantly inhibited tumorigenicity and tumor growth
in a mouse xenograft model. Analysis of the regulation of ZEB1 by miR-150 could
provide new insights into preventing metastasis and also suggests novel targeted 
therapeutic strategies in ESCC.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 23013135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Feb;94(1):168-73. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.09.003. Epub
2012 Sep 15.

Transcription factors associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
cancer stem cells in the tumor centre and margin of invasive breast cancer.

Alkatout I(1), Wiedermann M, Bauer M, Wenners A, Jonat W, Klapper W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospitals
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Germany. ibrahim.alkatout@uk-sh.de

Although tumor surgery aims for a complete resection respecting tumor-specific
safety distance, in many cases the most peripheral part, the invasion front,
remains in situ. Tumor cells at the tumor margin lose epithelial properties and
acquire features of mesenchymal cells. The process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) has been suggested to be of prime importance for tissue and
vessel invasion. Recently, features of EMT were shown to be linked to cells with 
tumor-founding capability, so- called cancer stem cells (CSC). In this study we
show that transcription factors associated with EMT markers Snail, Slug, Twist
and Zeb1 are differentially expressed between normal breast epithelium, ductal
carcinoma in situ and invasive breast cancer. Both invasive and in situ carcinoma
expressed less Slug and Twist and more Zeb1 compared to normal epithelium. Using 
fluorescence multi-staining the number of potential CSC among invasive cancer
cells varied dramatically depending on the staining combination used (18.5% for
CD44(+)/CD24(-) and 2.4% for CD49f(+)/CD24(+)). Interestingly, neither
transcription factors associated with EMT nor potential CSC counts varied between
tumor centre and invasion front. No association of these features with clinical
outcome was detected. Our results suggest that reliable in situ markers for EMT
are missing for invasive breast cancer. Alternatively, the process of EMT might
be activated in tumor cells at the margin as well as the centre. Furthermore, our
data show that the bio-markers of CSC detect very variable cell populations
within breast cancer, challenging the assumption of a hierarchical organization
of CSC in these tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22985790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Nov;11(11):2526-34. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0460.
Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stem cell markers in patients with
HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer.

Giordano A(1), Gao H, Anfossi S, Cohen E, Mego M, Lee BN, Tin S, De Laurentiis M,
Parker CA, Alvarez RH, Valero V, Ueno NT, De Placido S, Mani SA, Esteva FJ,
Cristofanilli M, Reuben JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, Unit 0054, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., 77030, Houston, TX, USA.

Currently, there is extensive information about circulating tumor cells (CTC) and
their prognostic value; however, little is known about other characteristics of
these cells. In this prospective study, we assessed the gene transcripts of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-inducing transcription factors (EMT-TF) and 
cancer stem cell (CSC) features in patients with HER2(+) metastatic breast cancer
(MBC). Epithelial cells were enriched from peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) using antibody-coated anti-CD326 antibody (CD326(+)) magnetic beads, and
the residual CD326(-) PBMCs were further depleted of leukocytes using anti-CD45
antibody-coated magnetic beads (CD326(-)CD45(-)). RNA was extracted from all cell
fractions, reverse transcribed to cDNA, and subjected to quantitative reverse
transcription PCR to detect EMT-TFs (TWIST1, SNAIL1, ZEB1, and TG2) as a measure 
of CTCs undergoing EMT (EMT-CTCs). In addition, PBMCs were analyzed using
multiparameter flow cytometry for ALDH activity and CSCs that express CD24, CD44,
and CD133. Twenty-eight patients were included in this study. At least one EMT-TF
mRNA was elevated in the CTCs of 88.2% of patients and in the CD326(-)CD45(-)
cell fraction of 60.7% of patients. The CD326(-)CD45(-) fraction of patients with
elevated SNAIL1 and ZEB1 transcripts also had a higher percentage of
ALDH(+)/CD133(+) cells in their blood than did patients with normal SNAIL1 and
ZEB1 expression (P = 0.038). Our data indicate that patients with HER2(+) MBCs
have EMT-CTCs. Moreover, an enrichment of CSCs was found in CD326(-)CD45(-)
cells. Additional studies are needed to determine whether EMT-CTCs and CSCs have 
prognostic value in patients with HER2(+) MBCs treated with trastuzumab-based
therapy.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3500676
PMID: 22973057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Nov;26(11):1857-67. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1199. Epub 2012 Sep
12.

The microRNA (miR)-199a/214 cluster mediates opposing effects of progesterone and
estrogen on uterine contractility during pregnancy and labor.

Williams KC(1), Renthal NE, Gerard RD, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jan;27(1):188.

Progesterone (P(4)) and estradiol-17ß (E(2)) play critical and opposing roles in 
regulating myometrial quiescence and contractility during pregnancy and labor.
Although these contrasting hormonal effects are likely mediated via differential 
regulation of inflammatory and contractile genes, the underlying mechanisms
remain incompletely understood. Recently we discovered that targets of the
microRNA (miR)-200 family, transcription factors zinc finger E-box binding
homeobox (ZEB)-1 and ZEB2, serve as P(4)/progesterone receptor-mediated
regulators of uterine quiescence during pregnancy. In the present study, we found
that levels of the clustered miRNAs, miR-199a-3p and miR-214, were significantly 
decreased in laboring myometrium of pregnant mice and humans and in an
inflammatory mouse model of preterm labor, whereas the miR-199a-3p/miR-214
target, cyclooxygenase-2, a critical enzyme in synthesis of proinflammatory
prostaglandins, was coordinately increased. Overexpression of miR-199a-3p and
miR-214 in cultured human myometrial cells inhibited cyclooxygenase-2 protein and
blocked TNF-a-induced myometrial cell contractility, suggesting their
physiological relevance. Notably, E(2) treatment of ovariectomized mice
suppressed, whereas P(4) enhanced uterine miR-199a-3p/214 expression.
Intriguingly, these opposing hormonal effects were mediated by ZEB1, which is
induced by P(4), inhibited by E(2) and activates miR199a/214 transcription.
Together, these findings identify miR-199a-3p/miR-214 as important regulators of 
myometrial contractility and provide new insight into strategies to prevent
preterm birth.

PMCID: PMC3487626
PMID: 22973051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jan;372(1-2):83-94. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1448-y. Epub
2012 Sep 13.

EGCG inhibits growth of human pancreatic tumors orthotopically implanted in Balb 
C nude mice through modulation of FKHRL1/FOXO3a and neuropilin.

Shankar S(1), Marsh L, Srivastava RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. sshankar@kumc.edu

Human pancreatic cancer is currently one of the fourth leading causes of
cancer-related mortality with a 5-year survival rate of less than 5 %. Since
pancreatic carcinoma is largely refractory to conventional therapies, there is a 
strong medical need for the development of novel and innovative cancer preventive
strategies. The forkhead transcription factors of the O class (FOXO) play a major
role in cell proliferation, angiogenesis, metastasis, and tumorigenesis. The
objectives of this study were to examine whether FKHRL1/FOXO3a modulates
antitumor activity of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), an active ingredient
in green tea, in pancreatic cancer model in vivo. PANC-1 cells were
orthotopically implanted into Balb c nude mice and gavaged with EGCG after tumor 
formation. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were measured by Ki67 and TUNEL
staining, respectively. The expression of PI3K, AKT, ERK, and FOXO3a/FKHRL1 and
its target genes were measured by the western blot analysis and/or q-RT-PCR.
FOXO-DNA binding was measured by gel shift assay. EGCG-treated mice showed
significant inhibition in tumor growth which was associated with reduced
phosphorylation of ERK, PI3K, AKT, and FKHRL1/FOXO3a, and modulation of FOXO
target genes. EGCG induced apoptosis by upregulating Bim and activating
caspase-3. EGCG modulated markers of cell cycle (p27/KIP1), angiogenesis (CD31,
VEGF, IL-6, IL-8, SEMA3F, and HIF1a), and metastasis (MMP2 and MMP7). The
inhibition of VEGF by EGCG was associated with suppression of neuropilin. EGCG
inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transition by upregulating the expression of
E-cadherin and inhibiting the expression of N-cadherin and Zeb1. These data
suggest that EGCG inhibits pancreatic cancer orthotopic tumor growth,
angiogenesis, and metastasis which are associated with inhibition of PI3K/AKT and
ERK pathways and activation of FKHRL1/FOXO3a. As a conclusion, EGCG can be used
for the prevention and/or treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3508371
PMID: 22971992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Agric Food Chem. 2012 Oct 3;60(39):9863-73. doi: 10.1021/jf303690x. Epub 2012
Sep 19.

EGCG inhibits transforming growth factor-ß-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition via the inhibition of Smad2 and Erk1/2 signaling pathways in nonsmall 
cell lung cancer cells.

Liu LC(1), Tsao TC, Hsu SR, Wang HC, Tsai TC, Kao JY, Way TD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, College of Life Science, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)-mediated epithelial mesenchymal transition
(EMT) of human lung cancer cells may contribute to lung cancer metastasis. It has
been reported that EGCG can inhibit tumorigenesis and cancer cell growth in lung 
cancer; however, the effect of EGCG on EMT in nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells has not been investigated. In this study, we found that NSCLC cells A549
and H1299 were converted to the fibroblastic phenotype in response to TGF-ß.
Epithelial marker E-cadherin was down-regulated, and mesenchymal marker vimentin 
was up-regulated simultaneously. Our results illustrated that TGF-ß was able to
induce EMT in NSCLC cells, and EGCG would reverse TGF-ß-induced morphological
changes, up-regulate the expression of E-cadherin, and down-regulate the
expression of vimentin. Immunofluorescent staining also demonstrated that
E-cadherin was up-regulated and that vimentin was down-regulated by EGCG
pretreatment. Moreover, wound-healing and the in vitro invasion assay showed that
EGCG could inhibit TGF-ß-induced migration and invasion of NSCLC cells. By using 
the dual-luciferase reporter assay, we demonstrated that EGCG inhibited
TGF-ß-induced EMT at the transcriptional level. EGCG decreased the
phosphorylation of Smad2 and Erk1/2, inhibited the nuclear translocation of
Smad2, and repressed the expression of transcription factors ZEB1, Snail, Slug,
and Twist, and up-regulated the expression of E-cadherin. In summary, our results
suggest that EGCG can inhibit TGF-ß-induced EMT via down-regulation of
phosphorylated Smad2 and Erk1/2 in NSCLC cells.

PMID: 22957988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 18;109(38):15312-7. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Loss of p63 and its microRNA-205 target results in enhanced cell migration and
metastasis in prostate cancer.

Tucci P(1), Agostini M, Grespi F, Markert EK, Terrinoni A, Vousden KH, Muller PA,
Dötsch V, Kehrloesser S, Sayan BS, Giaccone G, Lowe SW, Takahashi N, Vandenabeele
P, Knight RA, Levine AJ, Melino G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Toxicology Unit, Leicester University, Leicester,
United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2855.

p63 inhibits metastasis. Here, we show that p63 (both TAp63 and <U+0394>Np63 isoforms)
regulates expression of miR-205 in prostate cancer (PCa) cells, and miR-205 is
essential for the inhibitory effects of p63 on markers of epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT), such as ZEB1 and vimentin. Correspondingly, the inhibitory
effect of p63 on EMT markers and cell migration is reverted by anti-miR-205. p53 
mutants inhibit expression of both p63 and miR-205, and the cell migration, in a 
cell line expressing endogenous mutated p53, can be abrogated by pre-miR-205 or
silencing of mutated p53. In accordance with this in vitro data, <U+0394>Np63 or miR-205
significantly inhibits the incidence of lung metastasis in vivo in a mouse tail
vein model. Similarly, one or both components of the p63/miR-205 axis were absent
in metastases or colonized lymph nodes in a set of 218 human prostate cancer
samples. This was confirmed in an independent clinical data set of 281 patients. 
Loss of this axis was associated with higher Gleason scores, an increased
likelihood of metastatic and infiltration events, and worse prognosis. These data
suggest that p63/miR-205 may be a useful clinical predictor of metastatic
behavior in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3458363
PMID: 22949650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. BMC Cancer. 2012 Aug 29;12:377. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-377.

The T-box transcription factor Brachyury regulates epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in association with cancer stem-like cells in adenoid cystic carcinoma
cells.

Shimoda M(1), Sugiura T, Imajyo I, Ishii K, Chigita S, Seki K, Kobayashi Y,
Shirasuna K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maxillofacial Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 
3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The high frequencies of recurrence and distant metastasis of adenoid 
cystic carcinoma (AdCC) emphasize the need to better understand the biological
factors associated with these outcomes. To analyze the mechanisms of AdCC
metastasis, we established the green fluorescence protein (GFP)-transfected
subline ACCS-GFP from the AdCC parental cell line and the metastatic ACCS-M GFP
line from an in vivo metastasis model.
METHODS: Using these cell lines, we investigated the involvement of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem cell (CSCs) in AdCC
metastasis by real-time RT-PCR for EMT related genes and stem cell markers.
Characteristics of CSCs were also analyzed by sphere-forming ability and
tumorigenicity. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) silencing of target gene was also
performed.
RESULTS: ACCS-M GFP demonstrated characteristics of EMT and additionally
displayed sphere-forming ability and high expression of EMT-related genes (Snail,
Twist1, Twist2, Slug, zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 and 2 [Zeb1 and Zeb2],
glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta [Gsk3ß and transforming growth factor beta 2
[Tgf-ß2]), stem cell markers (Nodal, Lefty, Oct-4, Pax6, Rex1, and Nanog), and
differentiation markers (sex determining region Y [Sox2], Brachyury, and alpha
fetoprotein [Afp]). These observations suggest that ACCS-M GFP shows the
characteristics of CSCs and CSCs may be involved in the EMT of AdCC.
Surprisingly, shRNA silencing of the T-box transcription factor Brachyury (also a
differentiation marker) resulted in downregulation of the EMT and stem cell
markers. In addition, sphere-forming ability, EMT characteristics, and
tumorigenicity were simultaneously lost. Brachyury expression in clinical samples
of AdCC was extremely high and closely related to EMT. This finding suggests that
regulation of EMT by Brachyury in clinical AdCC may parallel that observed in
vitro in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of a single cell line is a limitation of this study.
However, parallel data from in vitro and clinical samples suggest the possibility
that EMT is directly linked to CSCs and that Brachyury is a regulator of EMT and 
CSCs.

PMCID: PMC3492149
PMID: 22931165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043584. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Distinct mesenchymal alterations in N-cadherin and E-cadherin positive primary
renal epithelial cells.

Keller C(1), Kroening S, Zuehlke J, Kunath F, Krueger B, Goppelt-Struebe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Renal tubular epithelial cells of proximal and distal origin differ
markedly in their physiological functions. Therefore, we hypothesized that they
also differ in their capacity to undergo epithelial to mesenchymal alterations.
RESULTS: We used cultures of freshly isolated primary human tubular cells. To
distinguish cells of different tubular origin we took advantage of the fact that 
human proximal epithelial cells uniquely express N-cadherin instead of E-cadherin
as major cell-cell adhesion molecule. To provoke mesenchymal alteration we
treated these cocultures with TGF-ß for up to 6 days. Within this time period,
the morphology of distal tubular cells was barely altered. In contrast to tubular
cell lines, E-cadherin was not down-regulated by TGF-ß, even though TGF-ß signal 
transduction was initiated as demonstrated by nuclear localization of Smad2/3.
Analysis of transcription factors and miRNAs possibly involved in E-cadherin
regulation revealed high levels of miRNAs of the miR200-family, which may
contribute to the stability of E-cadherin expression in human distal tubular
epithelial cells. By contrast, proximal tubular epithelial cells altered their
phenotype when treated with TGF-ß. They became elongated and formed
three-dimensional structures. Rho-kinases were identified as modulators of
TGF-ß-induced morphological alterations. Non-specific inhibition of Rho-kinases
resulted in stabilization of the epithelial phenotype, while partial effects were
observed upon downregulation of Rho-kinase isoforms ROCK1 and ROCK2. The distinct
reactivity of proximal and distal cells was retained when the cells were cultured
as polarized cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Interference with Rho-kinase signaling provides a target to
counteract TGF-ß-mediated mesenchymal alterations of epithelial cells,
particularly in proximal tubular epithelial cells. Furthermore, primary distal
tubular cells differed from cell lines by their high phenotypic stability which
included constant expression of E-cadherin. Our cell culture system of primary
epithelial cells is thus suitable to understand and modulate cellular remodeling 
processes of distinct tubular cells relevant for human renal disease.

PMCID: PMC3422254
PMID: 22912891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 4;109(36):14470-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212811109. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

An integrated transcriptional regulatory circuit that reinforces the breast
cancer stem cell state.

Polytarchou C(1), Iliopoulos D, Struhl K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) are a highly tumorigenic cell type present as a
minority population in developmentally diverse tumors and cell lines. Using a
genetic screen in an inducible model of CSC formation in a breast cell line, we
identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that inhibit CSC growth and are down-regulated in
CSCs. Aside from the previously identified miR-200 family, these include the
miR-15/16 (miR-16, miR-15b) and miR-103/107 (miR-103, miR-107) families as well
as miR-145, miR-335, and miR-128b. Interestingly, these miRNAs affect common
target genes that encode the Bmi1 and Suz12 components of the polycomb repressor 
complexes as well as the DNA-binding transcription factors Zeb1, Zeb2, and Klf4. 
Conversely, expression of the CSC-modulating miRNAs is inhibited by Zeb1 and
Zeb2. There is an inverse relationship between the levels of CSC-regulating
miRNAs and their respective targets in samples from triple-negative breast cancer
patients, providing evidence for the relevance of these interactions in human
cancer. In addition, combinatorial overexpression of these miRNAs progressively
attenuates the growth of CSCs derived from triple-negative breast cancers. These 
observations suggest that CSC formation and function are reinforced by an
integrated regulatory circuit of miRNAs, transcription factors, and
chromatin-modifying activities that can act as a bistable switch to drive cells
into either the CSC or the nonstem state within the population of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3437881
PMID: 22908280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell Signal. 2012 Dec;24(12):2273-82. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.08.004. Epub
2012 Aug 18.

PI3K/Akt to GSK3ß/ß-catenin signaling cascade coordinates cell colonization for
bladder cancer bone metastasis through regulating ZEB1 transcription.

Wu K(1), Fan J, Zhang L, Ning Z, Zeng J, Zhou J, Li L, Chen Y, Zhang T, Wang X,
Hsieh JT, He D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, PR China.

Muscle-invasive bladder cancer is associated with a high frequency of metastasis,
and bone is the most common metastatic site outside the pelvis. To clarify its
organ-specific characteristics, we generated a successive bone metastatic T24-B
bladder cancer subline following tail vein injection of metastatic T24-L cells.
Compared with parental T24-L cells, epithelial-like T24-B cells displayed
increased adhesion but decreased migration or invasion abilities as well as
up-regulation of cytokeratins and down-regulation of vimentin, N-cadherin and
MMP2. Mechanically, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt targets glycogen
synthase kinase-3ß (GSK3ß)/ß-catenin to control ZEB1 gene transcription, and then
subsequently regulates the expression of cytokeratins, vimentin and MMP2.
Importantly, ZEB1 is essential for bladder cancer invasion in vitro and distant
metastasis in vivo, and ZEB1 overexpression was highly correlated with the
expression of those downstream markers in clinical tumor samples. Overall, this
study reveals a novel mechanism facilitating metastatic bladder cancer cell
re-colonization into bone, and confirms the significance of
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in formation of bone metastasis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042436. Epub 2012 Aug 15.

TGF-beta induces serous borderline ovarian tumor cell invasion by activating EMT 
but triggers apoptosis in low-grade serous ovarian carcinoma cells.

Cheng JC(1), Auersperg N, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Apoptosis in ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells is induced by transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-ß). However, high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas (HGC)
are refractory to the inhibitory functions of TGF-ß; their invasiveness is
up-regulated by TGF-ß through epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) activation.
Serous borderline ovarian tumors (SBOT) have been recognized as distinct entities
that give rise to invasive low-grade serous carcinomas (LGC), which have a
relatively poor prognosis and are unrelated to HGC. While it is not fully
understood how TGF-ß plays disparate roles in OSE cells and its malignant
derivative HGC, its role in SBOT and LGC remains unknown. Here we demonstrate the
effects of TGF-ß on cultured SBOT3.1 and LGC-derived MPSC1 cells, which express
TGF-ß type I and type II receptors. TGF-ß treatment induced the invasiveness of
SBOT3.1 cells but reduced the invasiveness of MPSC1 cells. The analysis of
apoptosis, which was assessed by cleaved caspase-3 and trypan blue exclusion
assay, revealed TGF-ß-induced apoptosis in MPSC1, but not SBOT3.1 cells. The
pro-apoptotic effect of TGF-ß on LGC cells was confirmed in another immortalized 
LGC cell line ILGC. TGF-ß treatment led to the activation of Smad3 but not Smad2.
The specific TßRI inhibitor SB431542 and TßRI siRNA abolished the SBOT3.1
invasion induced by TGF-ß, and it prevented TGF-ß-induced apoptosis in MPSC1
cells. In SBOT3.1 cells, TGF-ß down-regulated E-cadherin and concurrently
up-regulated N-cadherin. TGF-ß up-regulated the expression of the transcriptional
repressors of E-cadherin, Snail, Slug, Twist and ZEB1. In contrast, co-treatment 
with SB431542 and TßRI depletion by siRNA abolished the effects of TGF-ß on the
relative cadherin expression levels and that of Snail, Slug, Twist and ZEB1 as
well. This study demonstrates dual TGF-ß functions: the induction of SBOT cell
invasion by EMT activation and apoptosis promotion in LGC cells.

PMCID: PMC3419689
PMID: 22905131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:254085. doi: 10.1155/2012/254085. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

TP53 mutation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and stemlike features in breast
cancer subtypes.

Coradini D(1), Fornili M, Ambrogi F, Boracchi P, Biganzoli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Community Health Sciences, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, 20133 Milan,
Italy. danila.coradini@yahoo.it

Altered p53 protein is prevalently associated with the pathologic class of
triple-negative breast cancers and loss of p53 function has recently been linked 
to the induction of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and acquisition of
stemness properties. We explored the association between TP53 mutational status
and expression of some genes involved in the canonical TGF-ß signaling pathway
(the most potent EMT inducer) and in two early EMT associated events: loss of
cell polarity and acquisition of stemness-associated features. We used a publicly
accessible microarray dataset consisting of 251 p53-sequenced primary breast
cancers. Statistical analysis indicated that mutant p53 tumors (especially those 
harboring a severe mutation) were consistent with the aggressive class of
triple-negative cancers and that, differently from cell cultures, surgical tumors
underexpressed some TGF-ß related transcription factors known as involved in EMT 
(ID1, ID4, SMAD3, SMAD4, SMAD5, ZEB1). These unexpected findings suggest an
interesting relationship between p53 mutation, mammary cell dedifferentiation,
and the concomitant acquisition of stemlike properties (as indicated by the
overexpression of PROM1 and NOTCH1 genes), which improve tumor cells
aggressiveness as indicated by the overexpression of genes associated with cell
proliferation (CDK4, CDK6, MKI67) and migration (CXCR4, MMP1).

PMCID: PMC3414214
PMID: 22899882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Oral Oncol. 2013 Jan;49(1):34-41. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2012.07.012. Epub
2012 Aug 11.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition transcription factor ZEB1/ZEB2 co-expression
predicts poor prognosis and maintains tumor-initiating properties in head and
neck cancer.

Chu PY(1), Hu FW, Yu CC, Tsai LL, Yu CH, Wu BC, Chen YW, Huang PI, Lo WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital and National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. pychu@vghtpe.gov.tw

OBJECTIVES: Both epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem cell
(CSC) properties may be involved in metastasis, which contributes to the high
mortality rate of patients with head and neck cancers (HNCs). However, the
mechanisms through which the EMT transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2 regulate HNC
are still unclear.
METHODS: Tumor initiating capability of HNC-CH133(+) cells with ZEB1/2 knockdown 
or co-overexpression was presented in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: In the present study, we demonstrated that ZEB1/ZEB2 expression was
significantly increased in HNC-CD133(+) CSC-like cells compared with HNC-CD133(-)
cells. The small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated co-knockdown of ZEB1 and ZEB2
(siZEB1/2) in HNC-CH133(+) cells suppressed their CSC-like properties, including 
self-renewal ability, the expression of stemness markers, and drug resistance. In
contrast, the co-overexpression of ZEB1/ZEB2 in HNC-CD133(-) cells enhanced their
sphere-forming ability and increased the percentage of CD44-positive cells and
side population cells. In vivo studies showed that the delivery of siZEB1/2 to
xenograft tumors in nude mice reduced tumor growth and the rate of distant
metastasis. In clinical samples, the levels of ZEB1/ZEB2 expression were low in
local lesions but high in metastatic lymph nodes in HNC tissues. Patients with
tumors that co-expressed ZEB1(high) and ZEB2(high) had especially poor survival
rates.
CONCLUSION: Therapies targeting ZEB1/ZEB2 in HNC-CD133(+) cells may provide a new
approach for HNC therapy in the future.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22892238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Clin Invest. 2012 Sep;122(9):3170-83. doi: 10.1172/JCI63608. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

ZEB1 drives prometastatic actin cytoskeletal remodeling by downregulating miR-34a
expression.

Ahn YH(1), Gibbons DL, Chakravarti D, Creighton CJ, Rizvi ZH, Adams HP,
Pertsemlidis A, Gregory PA, Wright JA, Goodall GJ, Flores ER, Kurie JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Metastatic cancer is extremely difficult to treat, and the presence of metastases
greatly reduces a cancer patient's likelihood of long-term survival. The ZEB1
transcriptional repressor promotes metastasis through downregulation of microRNAs
(miRs) that are strong inducers of epithelial differentiation and inhibitors of
stem cell factors. Given that each miR can target multiple genes with diverse
functions, we posited that the prometastatic network controlled by ZEB1 extends
beyond these processes. We tested this hypothesis using a mouse model of human
lung adenocarcinoma metastasis driven by ZEB1, human lung carcinoma cells, and
human breast carcinoma cells. Transcriptional profiling studies revealed that
ZEB1 controls the expression of numerous oncogenic and tumor-suppressive miRs,
including miR-34a. Ectopic expression of miR-34a decreased tumor cell invasion
and metastasis, inhibited the formation of promigratory cytoskeletal structures, 
suppressed activation of the RHO GTPase family, and regulated a gene expression
signature enriched in cytoskeletal functions and predictive of outcome in human
lung adenocarcinomas. We identified several miR-34a target genes, including
Arhgap1, which encodes a RHO GTPase activating protein that was required for
tumor cell invasion. These findings demonstrate that ZEB1 drives prometastatic
actin cytoskeletal remodeling by downregulating miR-34a expression and provide a 
compelling rationale to develop miR-34a as a therapeutic agent in lung cancer
patients.

PMCID: PMC3428095
PMID: 22850877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 4;32(27):3286-95. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.334. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Mutant p53 gain-of-function induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition through
modulation of the miR-130b-ZEB1 axis.

Dong P(1), Karaayvaz M, Jia N, Kaneuchi M, Hamada J, Watari H, Sudo S, Ju J,
Sakuragi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan. dongpeix@yahoo.co.jp

The tumor suppressor gene p53 has been implicated in the regulation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumor metastasis by regulating
microRNA (miRNA) expression. Here, we report that mutant p53 exerts oncogenic
functions and promotes EMT in endometrial cancer (EC) by directly binding to the 
promoter of miR-130b (a negative regulator of ZEB1) and inhibiting its
transcription. We transduced p53 mutants into p53-null EC cells, profiled the
miRNA expression by miRNA microarray and identified miR-130b as a potential
target of mutant p53. Ectopic expression of p53 mutants repressed the expression 
of miR-130b and triggered ZEB1-dependent EMT and cancer cell invasion. Loss of an
endogenous p53 mutation increased the expression of miR-130b, which resulted in
reduced ZEB1 expression and attenuation of the EMT phenotype. Furthermore,
re-expression of miR-130b suppressed mutant p53-induced EMT and ZEB1 expression. 
Importantly, the expression of miR-130 was significantly reduced in EC tissues,
and patients with higher expression levels of miR-130b survived longer. These
data provide a novel understanding of the roles of p53 gain-of-function mutations
in accelerating tumor progression and metastasis through modulation of the
miR-130b-ZEB1 axis.

PMCID: PMC3705163
PMID: 22847613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;132(4):785-94. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27736.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor induces epithelial to mesenchymal
transition, enhances tumor aggressiveness and predicts clinical outcome in
resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Funamizu N(1), Hu C, Lacy C, Schetter A, Zhang G, He P, Gaedcke J, Ghadimi MB,
Ried T, Yfantis HG, Lee DH, Subleski J, Chan T, Weiss JM, Back TC, Yanaga K,
Hanna N, Alexander HR, Maitra A, Hussain SP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH,
Bethesda, MD.

MIF is a proinflammatory cytokine and is implicated in cancer. A higher MIF level
is found in many human cancer and cancer-prone inflammatory diseases, including
chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. We tested the hypothesis that MIF
contributes to pancreatic cancer aggressiveness and predicts disease outcome in
resected cases. Consistent with our hypothesis we found that an elevated MIF mRNA
expression in tumors was significantly associated with poor outcome in resected
cases. Multivariate Cox-regression analysis further showed that MIF is
independently associated with patients' survival (HR = 2.26, 95% CI = 1.17-4.37, 
p = 0.015). Mechanistic analyses revealed that MIF overexpression decreased
E-cadherin and increased vimentin mRNA and protein levels in pancreatic cancer
cell lines, consistent with the features of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT). Furthermore, MIF-overexpression significantly increased ZEB1/2 and
decreased miR-200b expression, while shRNA-mediated inhibition of MIF increased
E-cadherin and miR-200b expression, and reduced the expression of ZEB1/2 in Panc1
cells. Re-expression of miR-200b in MIF overexpressing cells restored the
epithelial characteristics, as indicated by an increase in E-cadherin and
decrease in ZEB1/2 and vimentin expression. A reduced sensitivity to the
chemotherapeutic drug, gemcitabine, occurred in MIF-overexpressing cells.
Indicative of an increased malignant potential, MIF over-expressing cells showed 
significant increase in their invasion ability in vitro, and tumor growth and
metastasis in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model. These results support a role
of MIF in disease aggressiveness, indicating its potential usefulness as a
candidate target for designing improved treatment in pancreatic cancer.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3488363
PMID: 22821831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Histochem Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;138(6):847-60. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-0998-0. Epub
2012 Jul 22.

Expression of the E-cadherin repressors Snail, Slug and Zeb1 in urothelial
carcinoma of the urinary bladder: relation to stromal fibroblast activation and
invasive behaviour of carcinoma cells.

Schulte J(1), Weidig M, Balzer P, Richter P, Franz M, Junker K, Gajda M,
Friedrich K, Wunderlich H, Östman A, Petersen I, Berndt A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Jena University Hospital, 07740 Jena, Germany.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is regulated by interaction of carcinoma 
and stromal cells and crucial for progression of urinary bladder carcinoma (UBC).
Therefore, the influence of activated fibroblasts on the expression of E-cadherin
repressors as well as EMT and invasion in UBC was investigated. A correlative
analysis of the immunohistochemical expression of fibroblast (ASMA, S100A4, FAP, 
SDF1, PDGFRß) and EMT (Snail, Slug, Zeb1, E-cadherin) markers was performed on 49
UBC cases of different stages. The impact of distinguishable growth factor
stimulated fibroblasts on invasion, EMT, and E-cadherin repressor expression was 
investigated in an invasion model. In situ, invasiveness was significantly
correlated to the loss of membranous E-cadherin (E-cad_m) and increased Snail,
Slug, Zeb1 in tumour cells, as well as to increased ASMA, S100A4, and PDGFRß in
stromal cells. A significant correlation to nodal metastasis could be evidenced
for the loss of E-Cad_m, and for an increase in S100A4 and PDGFRß. Comparison of 
stromal and EMT markers revealed significant correlations of ASMA to Snail and
Slug; of S100A4 to the loss of E-cad_m and Zeb1; and of PDGFRß to the loss of
E-Cad_m, Slug and Zeb1. In vitro, TGFß1 induced myofibroblasts were the strongest
attractants, while aFGF or TGFß1/aFGF stimulated fibroblasts were the most potent
EMT inductors. As shown here for the first time, distinct sub-populations of
fibroblasts are to various extents associated with EMT and tumour progression in 
UBC. These relevant findings might be the basis for the identification of new
diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets selectively affecting tumour
supporting CAF effects.

PMID: 22820858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Aug;40(4):762-7. doi: 10.1042/BST20120085.

Pleiotropy of microRNA-192 in the kidney.

Jenkins RH(1), Martin J, Phillips AO, Bowen T, Fraser DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Cardiff University School of
Medicine, Heath Park, Cardiff, UK. jenkinsrh2@cf.ac.uk

Diverse aetiologies result in significant deviation from homoeostasis in the
kidney, leading to CKD (chronic kidney disease). CKD progresses to end-stage
renal disease principally as a result of renal fibrosis, although the molecular
mechanisms underlying this fibrotic process are still poorly understood. miRNAs
(microRNAs) are a recently discovered family of endogenous short single-stranded 
RNAs that regulate global gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. The 
recent findings from our laboratory and others discussed in the present review
outline pleiotropic roles for miR-192 in renal homoeostasis and in the fibrotic
kidney. We describe miR-192-driven anti-and pro-fibrotic effects via the
repression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 (zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox proteins 1 and
2), resulting in changes in extracellular matrix deposition and cell
differentiation.

PMID: 22817730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Oct;33(10):1953-64. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs225. Epub 2012
Jul 12.

MUC4 potentiates invasion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells through
stabilization of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1.

Rachagani S(1), Macha MA, Ponnusamy MP, Haridas D, Kaur S, Jain M, Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
MedicalCenter, Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA.

MUC4 is a type-1 transmembrane mucin differentially expressed in multiple cancers
and has previously been shown to potentiate progression and metastasis of
pancreatic cancer. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanisms
associated with the MUC4-induced invasion and metastasis in pancreatic cancer.
Stable silencing of MUC4 in multiple pancreatic cancer cells resulted in the
downregulation of N-cadherin and its interacting partner fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 (FGFR1) through downregulation of partly by pFAK, pMKK7, pJNK and
pc-Jun pathway and partly through PI-3K/Akt pathway. The downregulation of FGFR1 
in turn led to downregulation of pAkt, pERK1/2, pNF-<U+03BA>B, pIkBa, uPA, MMP-9,
vimentin, N-cadherin, Twist, Slug and Zeb1 and upregulation of E-cadherin,
Occludin, Cytokeratin-18 and Caspase-9 in MUC4 knockdown BXPC3 and Capan1 cells
compared with scramble vector transfected cells. Further, downregulation of FGFR1
was associated with a significant change in morphology and reorganization of the 
actin-cytoskeleton, leading to a significant decrease in motility (P < 0.00001)
and invasion (P < 0.0001) in vitro and decreased tumorigenicity and incidence of 
metastasis in vivo upon orthotopic implantation in the athymic mice. Taken
together, the results of the present study suggest that MUC4 promotes invasion
and metastasis by FGFR1 stabilization through the N-cadherin upregulation.

PMCID: PMC3529557
PMID: 22791819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e40293. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040293. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Ell3 enhances differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells by regulating
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and apoptosis.

Ahn HJ(1), Cha Y, Moon SH, Jung JE, Park KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seoul, Korea.

Ell3 is a testis-specific RNA polymerase II elongation factor whose cellular
function is not clear. The present study shows that Ell3 is activated during the 
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Furthermore, Ell3 plays a 
critical role in stimulating lineage differentiation of mESCs by promoting
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and suppressing apoptosis. Mouse ESCs
engineered to stably express Ell3 were rapidly differentiated compared with
control cells either under spontaneous differentiation or neural lineage-specific
differentiation conditions. Gene expression profile and quantitative RT-PCR
analysis showed that the expression of EMT markers, such as Zeb1 and Zeb2, two
major genes that regulate EMT, was upregulated in Ell3-overexpressing mESCs.
Remarkably, knockdown of Zeb1 attenuated the enhanced differentiation capacity of
Ell3-overexpressing mESCs, which indicates that Ell3 plays a role in the
induction of mESC differentiation by inducing EMT. In contrast to
Ell3-overexpressing mESCs, Ell3-knock down mESCs could not differentiate under
differentiation conditions and, instead, underwent caspase-dependent apoptosis.
In addition, apoptosis of differentiating Ell3-knock out mESCs was associated
with enhanced expression of p53. The present results suggest that Ell3 promotes
the differentiation of mESCs by activating the expression of EMT-related genes
and by suppressing p53 expression.

PMCID: PMC3386972
PMID: 22768269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int J Oncol. 2012 Sep;41(3):959-68. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1541. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Mesenchymal stem cells play a potential role in regulating the establishment and 
maintenance of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in MCF7 human breast cancer
cells by paracrine and induced autocrine TGF-ß.

Xu Q(1), Wang L, Li H, Han Q, Li J, Qu X, Huang S, Zhao RC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, P.R. China.

Although the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a normal process that
occurs during development, it is thought to be associated with cancer progression
and metastasis. Emerging evidence links mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in the
tumor microenvironment with the occurrence of EMT in cancer progression. In this 
study, the human breast cancer cell line MCF7 was co-cultured with human
adipose-derived MSCs (hAD-MSCs) in a transwell system. Co-cultured cells were
analyzed for changes in cellular morphology, EMT markers, protein expression and 
tumor characteristics. We found that co-cultured MCF7 cells underwent EMT and
established a stable mesenchymal phenotype after prolonged co-culturing. Here, we
demonstrate that paracrine transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) secreted by
hAD-MSCs regulated the establishment of EMT in MCF7 cells by targeting the
ZEB/miR-200 regulatory loop. The downregulation of paracrine TGF-ß1 levels can
inhibit and reverse the EMT progress by downregulating ZEB1/2 and upregulating
miR-200b and miR-200c. The maintenance of a stable mesenchymal state by MCF7
cells required the establishment of autocrine TGF-ß signaling to drive and
sustain ZEB expression, which had been initiated by the prolonged co-culturing
with hAD-MSCs. These results suggest that MSCs may promote breast cancer
metastasis by stimulating and facilitating the EMT process.

PMID: 22766682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem J. 2012 Oct 1;447(1):71-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120311.

Glucocorticoids induce CCN5/WISP-2 expression and attenuate invasion in oestrogen
receptor-negative human breast cancer cells.

Ferrand N(1), Stragier E, Redeuilh G, Sabbah M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Therapeutics, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, Paris,
France.

CCN5 (cysteine-rich 61/connective tissue growth factor/nephroblastoma
overexpressed 5)/WISP-2 [WNT1 (wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member
1)-inducible signalling pathway protein 2] is an oestrogen-regulated member of
the CCN family. CCN5 is a transcriptional repressor of genes associated with the 
EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and plays an important role in
maintenance of the differentiated phenotype in ER (oestrogen receptor)-positive
breast cancer cells. In contrast, CCN5 is undetectable in more aggressive
ER-negative breast cancer cells. We now report that CCN5 is induced in
ER-negative breast cancer cells such as MDA-MB-231 following glucocorticoid
exposure, due to interaction of the endogenous glucocorticoid receptor with a
functional glucocorticoid-response element in the CCN5 gene promoter.
Glucocorticoid treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells is accompanied by morphological
alterations, decreased invasiveness and attenuated expression of mesenchymal
markers, including vimentin, cadherin 11 and ZEB1 (zinc finger E-box binding
homeobox 1). Interestingly, glucocorticoid exposure did not increase CCN5
expression in ER-positive breast cancer cells, but rather down-regulated ER
expression, thereby attenuating oestrogen pathway signalling. Taken together, our
results indicate that glucocorticoid treatment of ER-negative breast cancer cells
induces high levels of CCN5 expression and is accompanied by the appearance of a 
more differentiated and less invasive epithelial phenotype. These findings
propose a novel therapeutic strategy for high-risk breast cancer patients.

PMID: 22765757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 31;109(31):12286-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209134109. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

A forward genetic screen reveals roles for Nfkbid, Zeb1, and Ruvbl2 in humoral
immunity.

Arnold CN(1), Pirie E, Dosenovic P, McInerney GM, Xia Y, Wang N, Li X, Siggs OM, 
Karlsson Hedestam GB, Beutler B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Using chemical germ-line mutagenesis, we screened mice for defects in the humoral
immune response to a type II T-independent immunogen and an experimental
alphavirus vector. A total of 26 mutations that impair humoral immunity were
recovered, and 19 of these mutations have been positionally cloned. Among the
phenovariants were bumble, cellophane, and Worker ascribed to mutations in
Nfkbid, Zeb1, and Ruvbl2, respectively. We show that I<U+03BA>BNS, the nuclear I<U+03BA>B-like 
protein encoded by Nfkbid, is required for the development of marginal zone and
peritoneal B-1 B cells and additionally required for extrafollicular antibody
responses to T-independent and -dependent immunogens. Zeb1 is also required for
marginal zone and peritoneal B-1 B-cell development as well as T-cell
development, germinal center formation, and memory B-cell responses. Finally,
Ruvbl2 is required for T-cell development and maximal T-dependent antibody
responses. Collectively, the mutations that we identified give us insight into
the points at which disruption of an antibody response can occur. All of the
mutations identified to date directly affect lymphocyte development or function; 
none have an exclusive effect on cells of the innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC3411946
PMID: 22761313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;132(4):745-54. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27708. Epub 2012 Jul
21.

ZEB/miR-200 feedback loop: at the crossroads of signal transduction in cancer.

Hill L(1), Browne G, Tulchinsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, University of Leicester, 
United Kingdom.

Embryonic differentiation programs of epithelial-mesenchymal and
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (EMT and MET) represent a mechanistic basis for
epithelial cell plasticity implicated in cancer. Transcription factors of the ZEB
protein family (ZEB1 and ZEB2) and several microRNA species (predominantly
miR-200 family members) form a double negative feedback loop, which controls EMT 
and MET programs in both development and tumorigenesis. In this article, we
review crosstalk between the ZEB/miR-200 axis and several signal transduction
pathways activated at different stages of tumor development. The close
association of ZEB proteins with these pathways is indirect evidence for the
involvement of a ZEB/miR-200 loop in tumor initiation, progression and spread.
Additionally, the configuration of signaling pathways involving ZEB/miR-200 loop 
suggests that ZEB1 and ZEB2 may have different, possibly even opposing, roles in 
some forms of human cancer.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22753312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Gut. 2013 Sep;62(9):1315-26. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301846. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

MicroRNA-200c modulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human
colorectal cancer metastasis.

Hur K(1), Toiyama Y, Takahashi M, Balaguer F, Nagasaka T, Koike J, Hemmi H, Koi
M, Boland CR, Goel A.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Cancer Research Laboratory, Baylor Research Institute and
Sammons Cancer Center, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75246, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Distant metastasis is the major cause of cancer-related death in
patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). Although the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family
is a crucial inhibitor of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human
cancer, the role of miR-200 members in the pathogenesis of metastatic CRC has not
been investigated.
DESIGN: Fifty-four pairs of primary CRC and corresponding matched liver
metastasis tissue specimens were analysed for expression and methylation status
of the miR-200 family members. Functional analysis of miR-200c overexpression was
investigated in CRC cell lines, and cells were analysed for proliferation,
invasion and migration. Expression of several miR-200c target genes (ZEB1, ETS1
and FLT1) and EMT markers (E-cadherin and vimentin) in CRC cell lines and tissue 
specimens was validated.
RESULTS: Liver metastasis tissues showed higher expression of miR-200c (primary
CRC = 1.31 vs. liver metastasis = 1.59; p = 0.0014) and miR-141 (primary CRC =
0.14 vs. liver metastasis = 0.17; p = 0.0234) than did primary CRCs, which was
significantly associated with hypomethylation of the promoter region of these
miRNAs (primary CRC = 61.2% vs. liver metastasis = 46.7%; p < 0.0001). The
invasive front in primary CRC tissues revealed low miR-200c expression by in situ
hybridization analysis. Transfection of miR-200c precursors resulted in enhanced 
cell proliferation but reduced invasion and migration behaviours in CRC cell
lines. Overexpression of miR-200c in CRC cell lines caused reduced expression of 
putative gene targets, and resulted in increased E-cadherin and reduced vimentin 
expression. The associations between miR-200c, target genes and EMT markers were 
validated in primary CRCs and matching liver metastasis tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-200c plays an important role in mediating EMT and metastatic
behaviour in the colon. Its expression is epigenetically regulated, and miR-200c 
may serve as a potential diagnostic marker and therapeutic target for patients
with CRC.

PMCID: PMC3787864
PMID: 22735571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Sep;8(9):2289-94. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Upregulated MALAT-1 contributes to bladder cancer cell migration by inducing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Ying L(1), Chen Q, Wang Y, Zhou Z, Huang Y, Qiu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, 200127, China.

Recent studies reveal that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to have
important regulatory roles in cancer biology, and lncRNA MALAT-1 expression is
upregulated in some tumors. However, the contributions of MALAT-1 to bladder
cancer metastasis remain largely unknown. In the present study we evaluated
MALAT-1 expression in bladder cancer tissues by real-time PCR, and defined its
biological functions. We verified that MALAT-1 levels were upregulated in bladder
cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues, and MALAT-1 expression was 
remarkably increased in primary tumors that subsequently metastasized, when
compared to those primary tumors that did not metastasize. SiRNA-mediated MALAT-1
silencing impaired in vitro bladder cancer cell migration. Downregulation of
MALAT-1 resulted in a decrease of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-associated ZEB1, ZEB2 and Slug levels, and an increase of E-cadherin
levels. We further demonstrated that MALAT-1 promoted EMT by activating Wnt
signaling in vitro. These data suggest an important role for MALAT-1 in
regulating metastasis of bladder cancer and the potential application of MALAT-1 
in bladder cancer therapy.

PMID: 22722759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. BJU Int. 2012 Dec;110(11 Pt C):E1131-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2012.11297.x.
Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers in renal cell carcinoma: 
impact on prognostic outcomes in patients undergoing radical nephrectomy.

Harada K(1), Miyake H, Kusuda Y, Fujisawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? There have been few
studies evaluating the prognostic value of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
markers in renal cell carcinoma (RCC); therefore, the significance of these
markers in the prognosis of patients with RCC, particularly that in those with
localized disease, remains largely unknown. Consideration of the expression
levels of potential epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers, particularly
clusterin and Twist in addition to conventional prognostic parameters, would
contribute to the prediction of disease recurrence after radical nephrectomy for 
localized renal cell carcinoma.OBJECTIVE:  To evaluate the expression of
multiple molecular markers involved in the process of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with the aim of clarifying the
prognostic significance of these markers in patients undergoing radical
nephrectomy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS:  The expression levels of 11 EMT markers, including
E-cadherin, N-cadherin, ß-catenin, <U+03B3>-catenin, clusterin, Slug, Snail, Twist,
vimentin, ZEB1 and ZEB2, in radical nephrectomy specimens from 122 patients with 
clinically localized RCC were measured by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS:  In this series, disease recurrence occurred in 39 (32.0%) patients,
with a 5-year recurrence-free survival rate of 64.4%.  Univariate analysis
identified expression levels of E-cadherin, clusterin, Twist and vimentin, in
addition to C-reactive protein (CRP) level, pathological stage and microvascular 
invasion, as significant predictors for disease recurrence.  Of these,
expression levels of clusterin and Twist, CRP levels and microvascular invasion
appeared to be independently related to disease recurrence on multivariate
analysis.  There were significant differences in recurrence-free survival
according to positive numbers of these four independent factors: disease
recurrence occurred in two of 26 patients negative for any risk factor (7.7%), 23
of 73 patients positive for one or two risk factors (31.5%) and 14 of 23 patients
positive for three or four risk factors (60.9%).
CONCLUSION:  Consideration of the expression levels of potential EMT markers,
particularly clusterin and Twist, in RCC specimens, in addition to conventional
prognostic parameters, contributes to the accurate prediction of disease
recurrence after radical nephrectomy for localized RCC.

© 2012 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 22712620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038773. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

TIMP-1 induces an EMT-like phenotypic conversion in MDCK cells independent of its
MMP-inhibitory domain.

Jung YS(1), Liu XW, Chirco R, Warner RB, Fridman R, Kim HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs) regulate
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) critical for the development of
epithelial organs as well as cancer cell invasion. TIMP-1 is frequently
overexpressed in several types of human cancers and serves as a prognostic
marker. The present study investigates the roles of TIMP-1 on the EMT process and
formation of the lumen-like structure in a 3D Matrigel culture of MDCK cells. We 
show that TIMP-1 overexpression effectively prevents cell polarization and
acinar-like structure formation. TIMP-1 induces expression of the developmental
EMT transcription factors such as SLUG, TWIST, ZEB1 and ZEB2, leading to
downregulation of epithelial marker and upregulation of mesenchymal markers.
Importantly, TIMP-1's ability to induce the EMT-like process is independent of
its MMP-inhibitory domain. To our surprise, TIMP-1 induces migratory and invasive
properties in MDCK cells. Here, we present a novel finding that TIMP-1 signaling 
upregulates MT1-MMP and MMP-2 expression, and potentiates MT1-MMP activation of
pro-MMP-2, contributing to tumor cell invasion. In spite of the fact that TIMP-1,
as opposed to TIMP-2, does not interact with and inhibit MT1-MMP, TIMP-1 may act 
as a key regulator of MT1-MMP/MMP-2 axis. Collectively, our findings suggest a
model in which TIMP-1 functions as a signaling molecule and also as an endogenous
inhibitor of MMPs. This concept represents a paradigm shift in the current view
of TIMP-1/MT1-MMP interactions and functions during cancer
development/progression.

PMCID: PMC3372473
PMID: 22701711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Aug;56(8):1247-58. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200150. Epub 2012
Jun 13.

Impairment of tumor-initiating stem-like property and reversal of
epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation in head and neck cancer by
resveratrol treatment.

Hu FW(1), Tsai LL, Yu CH, Chen PN, Chou MY, Yu CC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

SCOPE: Recent reports have demonstrated that head and neck cancer-derived
tumor-initiating cells (HNC-TICs) presented high tumorigenic,
chemoradioresistant, metastatic properties, and were coupled with gain of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) characteristics. The aim of this study
was to investigate the chemotherapeutic effect and regulatory mechanisms of
resveratrol on HNC-TICs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We first observed that the treatment of resveratrol
significantly downregulated the ALDH1 activity and CD44 positivity of head and
neck cancer (HNC) cells in a dose-dependent manner (p < 0.05). Moreover,
resveratrol treatment reduced self-renewal property and stemness genes signatures
(Oct4, Nanog, and Nestin) expression in sphere-forming HNC-TICs. Additionally,
the repressive effect of resveratrol on in vitro malignant properties including
invasiveness/anchorage-independent growth was mediated by regulating productions 
of EMT markers Slug, ZEB1, N-cadherin, E-cadherin, and Vimentin. Importantly, an 
in vivo nude mice model showed that resveratrol treatment to xenograft tumors by 
oral gavage reduced tumor growth, stemness, and EMT markers in vivo. Lastly,
synergistic effect of resveratrol and conventional chemotreatment attenuated
tumor-initiating cells property in HNC-TICs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that resveratrol would be a valuable
therapeutics clinically in combination with conventional chemotherapy treatment
modalities for malignant HNCs by elimination of tumor-initiating stem-like and
EMT properties.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22692956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Jul 22;19(4):541-56. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0007. Print
2012 Aug.

miR-200c is aberrantly expressed in leiomyomas in an ethnic-dependent manner and 
targets ZEBs, VEGFA, TIMP2, and FBLN5.

Chuang TD(1), Panda H, Luo X, Chegini N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32610-0294, USA. chuangtsaide@ufl.edu

MicroRNA-200c (miR-200c) through repression of specific target genes has been
associated with cellular transition, tumorigenesis, and tissue fibrosis. We
explored the expression and functional aspects of miR-200c in genesis of
leiomyomas (LYO), benign uterine tumors with fibrotic characteristic. Using LYO
and matched myometrium (MYO; n=76) from untreated and from patients exposed to
hormonal therapies (GNRH agonist (GNRHa), Depo-Provera, and oral contraceptives),
we found that miR-200c was expressed at significantly lower levels (P<0.05) in
LYO as compared with MYO. These levels were lower in LYO from African Americans
as compared with Caucasians, patients experiencing abnormal uterine bleeding and 
those exposed to GNRHa therapy. Gain-of-function of miR-200c in isolated
leiomyoma smooth muscle cells (LSMCs), myometrial smooth muscle cells (MSMCs),
and leiomyosarcoma cell line (SKLM-S1) repressed ZEB1/ZEB2 mRNAs and proteins,
with concurrent increase in E-cadherin (CDH1) and reduction in vimentin
expression, phenotypic alteration, and inhibition of MSMC and LSMC
proliferations. We further validated TIMP2, FBLN5, and VEGFA as direct targets of
miR-200c through interaction with their respective 3' UTRs, and other genes as
determined by microarray analysis. At tissue levels, LYO expressed lower levels
of TIMP2 and FBLN5 mRNAs but increased protein expressions, which to some extent 
altered due to hormonal exposure. Given the regulatory functions of ZEBs, VEGFA, 
FBLN5, and TIMP2 on cellular activities that promote cellular transition,
angiogenesis, and matrix remodeling, we concluded that altered expression of
miR-200c may have a significant impact on the outcome of LYO growth, maintenance 
of their mesenchymal and fibrotic characteristics, and possibly their associated 
symptoms.

PMCID: PMC3402184
PMID: 22685266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Sep;33(9):1639-46. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs195. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition increases tumor sensitivity to COX-2 inhibition
by apricoxib.

Kirane A(1), Toombs JE, Larsen JE, Ostapoff KT, Meshaw KR, Zaknoen S, Brekken RA,
Burrows FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Although cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, such as the late stage development 
drug apricoxib, exhibit antitumor activity, their mechanisms of action have not
been fully defined. In this study, we characterized the mechanisms of action of
apricoxib in HT29 colorectal carcinoma. Apricoxib was weakly cytotoxic toward
naive HT29 cells in vitro but inhibited tumor growth markedly in vivo.
Pharmacokinetic analyses revealed that in vivo drug levels peaked at 2-4 µM and
remained sufficient to completely inhibit prostaglandin E(2) production, but
failed to reach concentrations cytotoxic for HT29 cells in monolayer culture.
Despite this, apricoxib significantly inhibited tumor cell proliferation and
induced apoptosis without affecting blood vessel density, although it did promote
vascular normalization. Strikingly, apricoxib treatment induced a dose-dependent 
reversal of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), as shown by robust
upregulation of E-cadherin and the virtual disappearance of vimentin and ZEB1
protein expression. In vitro, either anchorage-independent growth conditions or
forced EMT sensitized HT29 and non-small cell lung cancer cells to apricoxib by
50-fold, suggesting that the occurrence of EMT may actually increase the
dependence of colon and lung carcinoma cells on COX-2. Taken together, these data
suggest that acquisition of mesenchymal characteristics sensitizes carcinoma
cells to apricoxib resulting in significant single-agent antitumor activity.

PMCID: PMC3514897
PMID: 22678114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(5):e1002723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002723. Epub 2012 May 
24.

EMT inducers catalyze malignant transformation of mammary epithelial cells and
drive tumorigenesis towards claudin-low tumors in transgenic mice.

Morel AP(1), Hinkal GW, Thomas C, Fauvet F, Courtois-Cox S, Wierinckx A,
Devouassoux-Shisheboran M, Treilleux I, Tissier A, Gras B, Pourchet J, Puisieux
I, Browne GJ, Spicer DB, Lachuer J, Ansieau S, Puisieux A.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR-S1052, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon, France.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an embryonic transdifferentiation 
process consisting of conversion of polarized epithelial cells to motile
mesenchymal ones. EMT-inducing transcription factors are aberrantly expressed in 
multiple tumor types and are known to favor the metastatic dissemination process.
Supporting oncogenic activity within primary lesions, the TWIST and ZEB proteins 
can prevent cells from undergoing oncogene-induced senescence and apoptosis by
abolishing both p53- and RB-dependent pathways. Here we show that they also
downregulate PP2A phosphatase activity and efficiently cooperate with an
oncogenic version of H-RAS in malignant transformation of human mammary
epithelial cells. Thus, by down-regulating crucial tumor suppressor functions,
EMT inducers make cells particularly prone to malignant conversion. Importantly, 
by analyzing transformed cells generated in vitro and by characterizing novel
transgenic mouse models, we further demonstrate that cooperation between an EMT
inducer and an active form of RAS is sufficient to trigger transformation of
mammary epithelial cells into malignant cells exhibiting all the characteristic
features of claudin-low tumors, including low expression of tight and adherens
junction genes, EMT traits, and stem cell-like characteristics. Claudin-low
tumors are believed to be the most primitive breast malignancies, having arisen
through transformation of an early epithelial precursor with inherent stemness
properties and metaplastic features. Challenging this prevailing view, we propose
that these aggressive tumors arise from cells committed to luminal
differentiation, through a process driven by EMT inducers and combining malignant
transformation and transdifferentiation.

PMCID: PMC3359981
PMID: 22654675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cancer Lett. 2012 Dec 1;325(1):42-53. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.05.024. Epub
2012 May 28.

Activation of canonical WNT/ß-catenin signaling enhances in vitro motility of
glioblastoma cells by activation of ZEB1 and other activators of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Kahlert UD(1), Maciaczyk D, Doostkam S, Orr BA, Simons B, Bogiel T, Reithmeier T,
Prinz M, Schubert J, Niedermann G, Brabletz T, Eberhart CG, Nikkhah G, Maciaczyk 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stereotactic Neurosurgery, Department of General Neurosurgery,
University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Here we show that activation of the canonical WNT/ß-catenin pathway increases the
expression of stem cell genes and promotes the migratory and invasive capacity of
glioblastoma. Modulation of WNT signaling alters the expression of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition activators, suggesting a role of this
process in the regulation of glioma motility. Using immunohistochemistry in
patient-derived glioblastoma samples we showed higher numbers of cells with
intranuclear signal for ß-catenin in the infiltrating edge of tumor compared to
central tumor parenchyma. These findings suggest that canonical WNT/ß-catenin
pathway is a critical regulator of GBM invasion and may represent a potential
therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22652173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Sci. 2012 Aug;103(8):1420-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02347.x. Epub
2012 Jul 11.

Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 promotes invasion and bone metastasis of
small cell lung cancer in vitro and in vivo.

Liu Y(1), Zhang N, Wang Y, Xu M, Liu N, Pang X, Cao J, Ma N, Pang H, Liu L, Zhang
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, China.

Bone is one of the most frequent targets of small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
metastasis and is closely associated with a poor prognosis, but the specific
cellular gene alterations responsible for SCLC with bone metastasis are unclear. 
Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) as an E-box transcriptional repressor
has been suggested that an important inducer of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and a promoter of tumor metastasis in colon, breast and lung
cancers. However, the relationship between ZEB1 and SCLC with bone metastasis is 
unclear. In this study, ZEB1 was found to be highly expressed in bone-metastatic 
SCLC tissues and cell lines as compared with those that were non-metastatic (P < 
0.05). Using a lentivirus RNA interference technique to knockdown ZEB1 expression
in bone-metastatic SCLC cells (SBC-5 cell line), we found that ZEB1 siRNA could
inhibit the invasive and migratory ability and decrease parathyroid
hormone-related protein expression, as determined by invasion assays and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Besides, ZEB1 siRNA significantly inhibited
the bone metastasis of SBC-5 cells in vivo. Furthermore, overexpression of ZEB1
in SBC-3 cells, which demonstrate promoted bone-metastatic potential,
dramatically promoted their invasive and migratory ability and parathyroid
hormone-related protein expression as well as increased the number and sites of
bone metastases in vivo compare to the control group. We also found that SBC-3
cells underwent EMT, as indicated by decreased epithelial markers and increased
mesenchymal marker expression. Taken together, these results indicate that ZEB1
promoted the invasive ability and bone metastasis of SCLC cells, and that this
was partially mediated via the EMT pathway.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22632166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8086-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00234-12. Epub 2012 May 23.

Shutoff of BZLF1 gene expression is necessary for immortalization of primary B
cells by Epstein-Barr virus.

Yu X(1), McCarthy PJ, Wang Z, Gorlen DA, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

The BZLF1 gene controls the switch between latent and lytic infection by
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). We previously reported that both the ZV and ZIIR
elements within the BZLF1 promoter, Zp, are potent transcription silencers within
the context of an intact EBV genome. We report here identification of another
sequence element, ZV', which synergized with ZV in repressing Zp via binding ZEB1
or ZEB2. We then determined the phenotype of a variant of EBV strain B95.8 in
which the ZV, ZV', and ZIIR elements were concurrently mutated. HEK293 cell lines
infected with this triple mutant (tmt) virus spontaneously synthesized 6- to
10-fold more viral BZLF1, BRLF1, BMRF1, and BLLF1 RNAs, 3- to 6-fold more viral
Zta, Rta, and EAD proteins, 3- to 5-fold more viral DNA, and 7- to 9-fold more
infectious virus than did 293 cell lines latently infected with either the ZV ZV'
double mutant (dmt) or ZIIR mutant (mt) virus. While ZV ZV' ZIIR tmt EBV
efficiently infected human primary blood B cells in vitro, it was highly
defective in immortalizing them. Instead of the nearly complete silencing of
BZLF1 gene expression that occurs within 4 days after primary infection with
wild-type EBV, the ZV ZV' ZIIR tmt-infected cells continued to synthesize BZLF1
RNA, with 90% of them dying within 9 days postinfection. BL41 cells infected with
this "superlytic" virus also exhibited increased synthesis of BZLF1 and BMRF1
RNAs. Thus, we conclude that the ZV, ZV', and ZIIR silencing elements act
synergistically to repress transcription from Zp, thereby tightly controlling
BZLF1 gene expression, which is crucial for establishing and maintaining EBV
latency.

PMCID: PMC3421699
PMID: 22623769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Sep;132(9):2148-57. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.78. Epub 2012
May 17.

Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition
in human keratinocytes.

Stoll SW(1), Rittié L, Johnson JL, Elder JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-5675, USA. sstoll@umich.edu

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Sep;132(9):2129-30.

We have shown that autocrine proliferation of human keratinocytes (KCs) is
strongly dependent upon amphiregulin (AREG), whereas blockade of heparin-binding 
EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) inhibits KC migration in scratch wound assays.
Here we demonstrate that expression of soluble HB-EGF (sHB-EGF) or full-length
transmembrane HB-EGF (proHB-EGF), but not proAREG, results in profound increases 
in KC migration and invasiveness in monolayer culture. Coincident with these
changes, HB-EGF significantly decreases mRNA expression of several epithelial
markers including keratins 1, 5, 10, and 14 while increasing expression of
markers of cellular motility including SNAI1, ZEB1, COX-2, and MMP1.
Immunostaining revealed HB-EGF-induced expression of the mesenchymal protein
vimentin and decreased expression of E-cadherin, as well as nuclear translocation
of ß-catenin. Suggestive of a trade-off between KC motility and proliferation,
overexpression of HB-EGF also reduced KC growth by >90%. We also show that HB-EGF
is strongly induced in regenerating epidermis after partial-thickness wounding of
human skin. Taken together, our data suggest that expression of HB-EGF in human
KCs triggers a migratory and invasive phenotype with many features of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which may be beneficial in the context
of cutaneous wound healing.

PMCID: PMC3423535
PMID: 22592159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Aug;93(1):173-81. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.04.021. Epub
2012 May 2.

Sirolimus modulates HIVAN phenotype through inhibition of epithelial mesenchymal 
transition.

Yadav A(1), Kumar D, Salhan D, Rattanavich R, Maheshwari S, Adabala M, Ding G,
Singhal PC.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Center, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North Shore-Long 
Island Jewish Health System, Manhasset, NY 11030, United States.

HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is characterized by proliferative phenotype in
the form of collapsing glomerulopathy and microcystic dilatation of tubules.
Recently, epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) of renal cells has been
demonstrated to contribute to the pathogenesis of proliferative HIVAN phenotype. 
We hypothesized that sirolimus would modulate HIVAN phenotype by attenuating
renal cell EMT. In the present study, we evaluated the effect of sirolimus on the
development of renal cell EMT as well as on display of HIVAN phenotype in a mouse
model of HIVAN (Tg26). Tg26 mice receiving normal saline (TgNS) showed enhanced
proliferation of both glomerular and tubular cells when compared to control
mice-receiving normal saline (CNS); on the other hand, Tg26 mice receiving
sirolimus (TgS) showed attenuated renal cell proliferation when compared with
TgNS. TgNS also showed increased number of a-SMA-, vimentin-, and FSP1-positive
cells (glomerular as well as tubular) when compared with CNS; however, TgS showed
reduced number of SMA, vimentin, and FSP1+ve renal cells when compared to TgNS.
Interestingly, sirolimus preserved renal epithelial cell expression of E-cadherin
in TgS. Since sirolimus attenuated renal cell ZEB expression (a repressor of
E-cadherin transcription), it appears that sirolimus may be attenuating renal
cell EMT by preserving epithelial cell E-cadherin expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3372700
PMID: 22579465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 May 8;14(3):R73.

Chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 5 plays a tumor suppressor role in
human breast cancer.

Wu X(1), Zhu Z, Li W, Fu X, Su D, Fu L, Zhang Z, Luo A, Sun X, Fu L, Dong JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Nankai University College of Life
Sciences, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin 300071, China.

INTRODUCTION: The chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 5 (CHD5) has recently
been identified as a tumor suppressor in a mouse model. The CHD5 locus at 1p36 is
deleted, and its mutation has been detected in breast cancer. We, therefore,
evaluated whether CHD5 plays a role in human breast cancer.
METHODS: We screened mutations in 55 tumors, determined promoter methylation in
39 tumors, measured RNA expression in 90 tumors, analyzed protein expression in
289 tumors, and correlated expression changes with clinicopathological
characteristics of breast cancer. Functional effects of CHD5 on cell
proliferation, invasion and tumorigenesis were also tested.
RESULTS: Although only one mutation was detected, CHD5 mRNA expression was
significantly reduced, accompanied by frequent genomic deletion and promoter
methylation, in breast cancer. The extent of methylation was significantly
associated with reduced mRNA expression, and demethylating treatment restored
CHD5 expression. Lower CHD5 mRNA levels correlated with lymph node metastasis (P 
= 0.026). CHD5 protein expression was also reduced in breast cancer, and lack of 
CHD5 expression significantly correlated with higher tumor stage,
ER/PR-negativity, HER2 positivity, distant metastasis and worse patient survival 
(P = 0.01). Functionally, ectopic expression of CHD5 in breast cancer cells
inhibited cell proliferation and invasion in vitro and tumorigenesis in nude
mice. Consistent with the inhibition of invasion, CHD5 down-regulated mesenchymal
markers vimentin, N-cadherin and ZEB1 in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of CHD5, mediated at least in part by promoter
methylation, contributes to the development and progression of human breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3446335
PMID: 22569290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Reprod Sci. 2012 Aug;19(8):786-96. doi: 10.1177/1933719112438448. Epub 2012 May
8.

Endometrial miR-200c is altered during transformation into cancerous states and
targets the expression of ZEBs, VEGFA, FLT1, IKKß, KLF9, and FBLN5.

Panda H(1), Pelakh L, Chuang TD, Luo X, Bukulmez O, Chegini N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32610, USA.

A number of microRNAs (miRNAs), including miR-200 family, are aberrantly
expressed in endometriosis and endometrial cancer. Here we assessed the
expression and functional aspects of miR-200c in endometrial tissues (N = 52)
from normal endometrial biopsies (N = 15), endometrial tissues including those
exposed to hormonal therapies (N = 20), and grade I-III endometrial cancer (N =
17). miR-200c expression was elevated in normal endometrial biopsies from mid-
and late-luteal phase, and in endometrial tumors as compared to endometrial
tissues from peri- and postmenopausal period (P < .05) and its pattern of
temporal expression displayed an inverse relationship with the expression of
ZEBs. The expression of E-cadherin (CDH1) varied, but expressed at low levels,
specifically in endometrial tissues and endometrial tumors. The endometrial
expression of ZEBs and CDH1 in patients who were exposed to Depo-Provera and
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist GnRHa displayed a trend toward lower
expression as compared to proliferative phase; however, treatment of Ishikawa
cells with 17ß-estradiol, progesterone, and medroxy progesterone acetate had
modest effects on the expression of miR-200c and ZEBs without affecting CDH1
expression. Gain of function of miR-200c in Ishikawa cells repressed ZEBs, as
well as VEGFA, FLT1, IKKß, and KLF9 expression at transcriptional and
translational levels through direct interaction with their respective
3'untranslated regions and increased the rate of their proliferation. These
results indicated that endometrial miR-200c expression undergoes dynamic changes 
during transition from normal into cancerous states; possibly influenced by
hormonal milieu and by targeting the expression of specific genes with key
regulatory functions in cellular transformation, inflammation, and angiogenesis
may influence these events during normal and disease progression.

PMCID: PMC4046309
PMID: 22569286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 15;287(25):21290-302. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.357202. Epub
2012 May 3.

Activation of Wnt11 by transforming growth factor-ß drives mesenchymal gene
expression through non-canonical Wnt protein signaling in renal epithelial cells.

Zhang P(1), Cai Y, Soofi A, Dressler GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA.

Transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß) promotes renal interstitial fibrosis in
vivo and the expression of mesenchymal genes in vitro; however, most of its
direct targets in epithelial cells are still elusive. In a screen for genes
directly activated by TGF-ß, we found that components of the Wnt signaling
pathway, especially Wnt11, were targets of activation by TGF-ß and Smad3 in
primary renal epithelial cells. In gain and loss of function experiments, Wnt11
mediated the actions of TGF-ß through enhanced activation of mesenchymal marker
genes, such as Zeb1, Snail1, Pai1, and aSMA, without affecting Smad3
phosphorylation. Inhibition of Wnt11 by receptor knockdown or treatment with Wnt 
inhibitors limited the effects of TGF-ß on gene expression. We found no evidence 
that Wnt11 activated the canonical Wnt signaling pathway in renal epithelial
cells; rather, the function of Wnt11 was mediated by the c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNK) pathway. Consistent with the in vitro results, all the TGF-ß, Wnt11, and
JNK targets were activated in a unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model of
renal fibrosis in vivo. Our findings demonstrated cooperativity among the TGF-ß, 
Wnt11, and JNK signaling pathways and suggest new targets for anti-fibrotic
therapy in renal tissue.

PMCID: PMC3375550
PMID: 22556418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jul;41(1):189-200. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1457. Epub 2012 Apr
30.

Identification of a GaGß<U+03B3>, AKT and PKCa signalome associated with invasive growth
in two genetic models of human breast cancer cell epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition.

Ouelaa-Benslama R(1), De Wever O, Hendrix A, Sabbah M, Lambein K, Land D, Prévost
G, Bracke M, Hung MC, Larsen AK, Emami S, Gespach C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics, Centre de Recherche
Saint-Antoine and Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6, Paris, France.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) confers an aggressive subtype
associated with chemotherapy resistance in epithelial cancers. However, the
mechanisms underlying the EMT and its associated signaling dysfunctions are still
poorly understood. In two genetic models of MCF-7 breast cancer cells induced to 
EMT by WISP-2 silencing and Snail transformation, we investigated the status of
several signaling elements downstream of G-protein receptors (GPR) and their
functional roles in the invasive growth potential. We report that the E-cadherin 
repressors Slug, Zeb1/2 and Twist are overexpressed in these EMT cells
characterized by a triple negative phenotype (loss of estrogen ERa and
progesterone PRA/PRB receptors, no HER2 amplification), combined with loss of the
alternative GPR30 estrogen receptor and induction of the invasive growth in
collagen type I gels. Ectopic Snail expression suppressed WISP-2 transcripts and 
down-regulated WISP-2 gene promoter expression in transfected cells. Accordingly,
WISP-2 transcripts and Wisp-2 protein were depleted in these two convergent
models of BC cell EMT. The EMT caused dominance of several proinvasive pathways
downstream of GPR, including GaGß<U+03B3> subunits, PKCa, AKT and c-Jun induction,
constitutive activation of the actin-remodeling GTPase Rac1, coupled with growth 
responses (more cells at S and G2/M phases of the cell cycle), in line with
inhibition of the p27kip1/cyclin-dependent kinase CDK3 cascade. RNA interference 
or selective inhibitors targeting GaGß<U+03B3> subunits (BIM-46187, gallein), PKCa
(Gö6976, MT477, sh-RNAs) and PI3K-AKT (wortmannin) alleviated the invasive
phenotype. In contrast, MCF-7 cells in EMT showed signaling independence to
inhibitors of HER family tyrosine kinases and the mitogen- and stress-activated
protein kinases. Our study suggests that the signaling protagonists GaGß<U+03B3>, PKCa
and PI3K-AKT are promising candidates as predictive molecular biomarkers and
therapeutic targets in the management of clinical BC in EMT.

PMID: 22552300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cancer Lett. 2012 Oct 1;323(1):69-76. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.03.035. Epub
2012 Apr 24.

Decreased carbonyl reductase 1 expression promotes malignant behaviours by
induction of epithelial mesenchymal transition and its clinical significance.

Murakami A(1), Yakabe K, Yoshidomi K, Sueoka K, Nawata S, Yokoyama Y, Tsuchida S,
Al-Mulla F, Sugino N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Minamikogushi, Ube, Japan. muraaki@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

Human carbonyl reductase 1 (CBR1) is an enzyme that catalyse the reduction of
many compounds by using NADPH-dependent oxydoreductase activity. Although CBR1 is
known to regulate the tumour progression, the molecular mechanisms of CBR1 in
cancer progression and the clinical significance of CBR1 status remain unclear.
Here, we investigated the molecular mechanisms by which CBR1 affects cancer cell 
behaviour in vitro and the clinical significance of CBR1 using
immunohistochemical analyses in endometrial cancer. Here, the role of CBR1 in
cancer cell invasion and metastasis, and its molecular mechanisms were
investigated by transfection of sense and antisense CBR1 cDNAs into a human
endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line. The relationship between CBR1 expression
analysed by immunohistochemistry and prognosis such as progression free survival 
(PFS) and overall survival (OS) was examined in endometrial cancer tissues from
FIGO stage I-IV (n=109). Suppression of CBR1 by antisense CBR1 cDNA increased
cancer cell invasion, and suppressed E-cadherin expression and capacity for
cellular aggregation. In contrast, over-expression of CBR1 by sense CBR1 cDNA
increased E-cadherin expression and capacity for cellular aggregation, and
suppressed cancer cell invasion. The expression of transcriptional suppressors of
E-cadherin, Snail and ZEB1, were increased by CBR1 suppression, but suppressed by
CBR1 over-expression. Immunohistochemical analyses showed that decreased CBR1
expression is significantly related with poor PFS and OS compared with strong
CBR1 expression. In multivariate analyses, decreased CBR1 expression was an
independent prognostic factor for PFS and OS. CBR1 regulates cancer cell invasion
in endometrial adenocarcinomas by regulating the epithelial mesenchymal
transition. A decreased CBR1 expression can be a useful marker of an unfavourable
clinical outcome in patients with endometrial cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22542806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. FASEB J. 2012 Aug;26(8):3230-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-205609. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Salt-inducible kinase 1 regulates E-cadherin expression and intercellular
junction stability.

Eneling K(1), Brion L, Pinto V, Pinho MJ, Sznajder JI, Mochizuki N, Emoto K,
Soares-da-Silva P, Bertorello AM.

Author information: 
(1)Membrane Signaling Networks, Atherosclerosis Research Unit, Department of
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska
University Hospital-Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.

The protein kinase liver kinase B1 (LKB1) regulates cell polarity and
intercellular junction stability. Also, LKB1 controls the activity of
salt-inducible kinase 1 (SIK1). The role and relevance of SIK1 and its downstream
effectors in linking the LKB1 signals within these processes are partially
understood. We hypothesize that SIK1 may link LKB1 signals to the maintenance of 
epithelial junction stability by regulating E-cadherin expression. Results from
our studies using a mouse lung alveolar epithelial (MLE-12) cell line or human
renal proximal tubule (HK2) cell line transiently or stably lacking the
expression of SIK1 (using SIK1 siRNAs or shRNAs), or with its expression
abrogated (sik1(+/+) vs. sik1(-/-) mice), indicate that suppression of SIK1
(~40%) increases the expression of the transcriptional repressors Snail2
(~12-fold), Zeb1 (~100%), Zeb2 (~50%), and TWIST (~20-fold) by activating
cAMP-response element binding protein. The lack of SIK1 and activation of
transcriptional repressors decreases the availability of E-cadherin (mRNA and
protein expression by ~100 and 80%, respectively) and the stability of
intercellular junctions in epithelia (decreases in transepithelial resistance).
Furthermore, LKB1-mediated increases in E-cadherin expression are impaired in
cells where SIK1 has been disabled. We conclude that SIK1 is a key regulator of
E-cadherin expression, and thereby contributes to the stability of intercellular 
junctions.

PMCID: PMC3405263
PMID: 22522110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035440. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

A novel network integrating a miRNA-203/SNAI1 feedback loop which regulates
epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Moes M(1), Le Béchec A, Crespo I, Laurini C, Halavatyi A, Vetter G, Del Sol A,
Friederich E.

Author information: 
(1)Cytoskeleton and Cell Plasticity Lab, Life Sciences Research Unit-FSCT,
University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

BACKGROUND: The majority of human cancer deaths are caused by metastasis. The
metastatic dissemination is initiated by the breakdown of epithelial cell
homeostasis. During this phenomenon, referred to as epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), cells change their genetic and trancriptomic program leading to
phenotypic and functional alterations. The challenge of understanding this
dynamic process resides in unraveling regulatory networks involving master
transcription factors (e.g. SNAI1/2, ZEB1/2 and TWIST1) and microRNAs. Here we
investigated microRNAs regulated by SNAI1 and their potential role in the
regulatory networks underlying epithelial plasticity.
RESULTS: By a large-scale analysis on epithelial plasticity, we highlighted
miR-203 and its molecular link with SNAI1 and the miR-200 family, key regulators 
of epithelial homeostasis. During SNAI1-induced EMT in MCF7 breast cancer cells, 
miR-203 and miR-200 family members were repressed in a timely correlated manner. 
Importantly, miR-203 repressed endogenous SNAI1, forming a double negative
miR203/SNAI1 feedback loop. We integrated this novel miR203/SNAI1 with the known 
miR200/ZEB feedback loops to construct an a priori EMT core network. Dynamic
simulations revealed stable epithelial and mesenchymal states, and underscored
the crucial role of the miR203/SNAI1 feedback loop in state transitions
underlying epithelial plasticity.
CONCLUSION: By combining computational biology and experimental approaches, we
propose a novel EMT core network integrating two fundamental negative feedback
loops, miR203/SNAI1 and miR200/ZEB. Altogether our analysis implies that this
novel EMT core network could function as a switch controlling epithelial cell
plasticity during differentiation and cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3325969
PMID: 22514743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Clin Invest. 2012 May;122(5):1849-68. doi: 10.1172/JCI59218. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition can suppress major attributes of human
epithelial tumor-initiating cells.

Celià-Terrassa T(1), Meca-Cortés O, Mateo F, Martínez de Paz A, Rubio N,
Arnal-Estapé A, Ell BJ, Bermudo R, Díaz A, Guerra-Rebollo M, Lozano JJ, Estarás
C, Ulloa C, Álvarez-Simón D, Milà J, Vilella R, Paciucci R, Martínez-Balbás M, de
Herreros AG, Gomis RR, Kang Y, Blanco J, Fernández PL, Thomson TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Barcelona Institute of Molecular Biology, Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Jun;12(6):378.

Malignant progression in cancer requires populations of tumor-initiating cells
(TICs) endowed with unlimited self renewal, survival under stress, and
establishment of distant metastases. Additionally, the acquisition of invasive
properties driven by epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is critical for the 
evolution of neoplastic cells into fully metastatic populations. Here, we
characterize 2 human cellular models derived from prostate and bladder cancer
cell lines to better understand the relationship between TIC and EMT programs in 
local invasiveness and distant metastasis. The model tumor subpopulations that
expressed a strong epithelial gene program were enriched in highly metastatic
TICs, while a second subpopulation with stable mesenchymal traits was
impoverished in TICs. Constitutive overexpression of the transcription factor
Snai1 in the epithelial/TIC-enriched populations engaged a mesenchymal gene
program and suppressed their self renewal and metastatic phenotypes. Conversely, 
knockdown of EMT factors in the mesenchymal-like prostate cancer cell
subpopulation caused a gain in epithelial features and properties of TICs. Both
tumor cell subpopulations cooperated so that the nonmetastatic mesenchymal-like
prostate cancer subpopulation enhanced the in vitro invasiveness of the
metastatic epithelial subpopulation and, in vivo, promoted the escape of the
latter from primary implantation sites and accelerated their metastatic
colonization. Our models provide new insights into how dynamic interactions among
epithelial, self-renewal, and mesenchymal gene programs determine the plasticity 
of epithelial TICs.

PMCID: PMC3366719
PMID: 22505459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Aug;138(8):1329-38. doi: 10.1007/s00432-012-1206-2.
Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Lentivirus-delivered ZEB-1 small interfering RNA inhibits lung adenocarcinoma
cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

Liu Y(1), Yan X, Liu N, Zhou J, Liu J, Pang H, Cao J, Liu Y, Wang Y, Liu L, Zhang
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 1
Xinsi Road, Xi'an 710038, China.

PURPOSE: To explore the relationship between the expression of ZEB1 gene and the 
proliferation ability of lung adenocarcinoma cells.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, Western blot and Real-time PCR were used to detect
the expression of ZEB1 gene in lung adenocarcinoma tissue and cell lines compared
with adjacent noncancerous region and the human lung fibroblast cell HLF cells.
The lentivirus RNA interference technique was used to knock down the expression
of ZEB1 in lung adenocarcinoma A549 and H1299 cell lines. Cell cycle and cell
apoptosis were measured by FCM assay. In vivo, four groups of 4-week-old nude
mice were subcutaneously injected with the stably transfected (ZEB-si, scr-si)
cells at a single site to investigate the effect of ZEB1-siRNA in the nude mice
tumor growth. In situ apoptosis was detection by TUNEL assay.
RESULTS: ZEB-1 was highly expressed in lung adenocarcinoma tissue and cell lines 
compared with adjacent noncancerous region and the human lung fibroblast cell HLF
cells. ZEB1-siRNA could decrease lung adenocarcinoma cell proliferation by
delaying S-phase entry and induce cell apoptosis, which led to the inhibition of 
the tumorigenicity of A549 and H1299 cell lines. Further investigation showed
that injecting the ZEB1-siRNA cells into the nude mice could significantly
decrease the tumor growth.
CONCLUSION: Knockdown of ZEB-1 expression by lentivirus-delivered siRNA may
provide a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of lung cancer.

PMID: 22481253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034071. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

EGF-induced EMT and invasiveness in serous borderline ovarian tumor cells: a
possible step in the transition to low-grade serous carcinoma cells?

Cheng JC(1), Auersperg N, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

In high-grade ovarian cancer cultures, it has been shown that epidermal growth
factor (EGF) induces cell invasion by activating an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). However, the effect of EGF on serous borderline ovarian tumors 
(SBOT) and low-grade serous carcinomas (LGC) cell invasion remains unknown. Here,
we show that EGF receptor (EGFR) was expressed, that EGF treatment increased cell
migration and invasion in two cultured SBOT cell lines, SBOT3.1 and SV40 large T 
antigen-infected SBOT cells (SBOT4-LT), and in two cultured LGC cell lines, MPSC1
and SV40 LT/ST-immortalized LGC cells (ILGC). However, EGF induced
down-regulation of E-cadherin and concurrent up-regulation of N-cadherin in SBOT 
cells but not in LGC cells. In SBOT cells, the expression of the transcriptional 
repressors of E-cadherin, Snail, Slug and ZEB1 were increased by EGF treatment.
Treatment with EGF led to the activation of the downstream ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt.
The MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 diminished the EGF-induced cadherin switch and the
up-regulation of Snail, Slug and ZEB1 and the EGF-mediated increase in SBOT cell 
migration and invasion. The PI3K inhibitor LY294002 had similar effects, but it
could not block the EGF-induced up-regulation of N-cadherin and ZEB1. This study 
demonstrates that EGF induces SBOT cell migration and invasion by activating EMT,
which involves the activation of the ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt pathways and,
subsequently, Snail, Slug and ZEB1 expression. Moreover, our results suggest that
there are EMT-independent mechanisms that mediate the EGF-induced LGC cell
migration and invasion.

PMCID: PMC3316602
PMID: 22479527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Jul;366(1-2):223-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1299-6. Epub
2012 Mar 31.

Overexpression of ZEB1 associated with metastasis and invasion in patients with
gastric carcinoma.

Jia B(1), Liu H, Kong Q, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, General Hospital of Chinese People's
Liberation Army, No. 28, Fuxing Rd, Beijing 100853, People's Republic of China.
jiabq301@163.com

The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of ZEB1 in gastric
carcinoma, its correlation with the clinicopathology of gastric carcinoma, and
the role of ZEB1 in invasion and metastasis in gastric carcinoma. ZEB1 expression
was analyzed by immunohistochemistry and Western blot in 45 gastric carcinoma
tissue samples that contained the adjacent gastric mucosa. The correlation
between ZEB1 expression, the occurrence and development of gastric cancer, and
clinical pathology was investigated. ZEB1 expression in the human gastric
carcinoma cell line AGS was downregulated by RNA interference, and changes in
ZEB1 expression corresponded with changes in the invasive and metastatic ability 
of AGS cells. Immunohistochemistry revealed that ZEB1 protein expression in
gastric carcinoma tissues was significantly higher than in normal gastric mucosa 
tissues (p < 0.001). A lower degree of differentiation of gastric cancer (p =
0.009), a higher TNM (tumor, node, and metastasis) stage (p = 0.010), and a
larger scope of invasion were correlated with higher expression of ZEB1 (p =
0.041, 0.002). However, the expression of ZEB1 in gastric carcinoma tissue was
independent of gender, age, and tumor size (p > 0.05). Western blot results also 
showed that ZEB1 protein expression was significantly higher in gastric carcinoma
tissue than in the adjacent normal gastric mucosa tissue (p = 0.008). A lower
degree of differentiation of the gastric carcinoma correlated with a higher TNM
stage, and a larger scope of invasion correlated with increased ZEB1 expression
(p = 0.023). Transfection of ZEB1 siRNA in AGS cells significantly decreased the 
expression level of ZEB1 protein (p = 0.035). Furthermore, the number of cells
that could pass through the Transwell chamber was significantly lower in the
transfected group than in the non-transfected control group (p = 0.039),
indicating that the suppression of ZEB1 expression could significantly reduce the
invasive and metastatic ability of AGS cells (p = 0.005). Concluding, in gastric 
carcinoma tissue, overexpression of ZEB1 may be related to the occurrence and
development as well as invasion and metastasis of gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 22466758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Respirology. 2012 Oct;17(7):1048-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2012.02173.x.

Emerging evidence of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in lung carcinogenesis.

Sato M(1), Shames DS, Hasegawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. msato@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental programme that 
regulates embryonic morphogenesis and involves significant morphological and
molecular changes in cells. Experimental models have revealed that EMT also
contributes to various malignant features of cancer cells, including motile,
invasive, anti-apoptotic and stem-like phenotypes. Clinically, correlative
studies have indicated that mesenchymal-like features of tumour cells are
associated with poor tumour differentiation as well as worse patient prognosis.
Nevertheless, due to its transitory nature, demonstration of an actual occurrence
of EMT during human carcinogenesis is challenging, and most of the evidence to
date has been limited to breast and colorectal cancers. However, recent studies
suggest that EMT may occur during lung cancer development, although such evidence
is still limited. We propose three approaches for obtaining direct evidence of
EMT in human cancers and use these criteria to review the available data. We
suggest that multiple intrinsic and extrinsic factors cooperatively induce EMT in
lung cancer. Intrinsic factors include oncogenic genetic changes such as mutant
K-RAS. Extrinsic factors are associated with a tumour microenvironment that is
inflammatory and hypoxic. The induction of EMT is primarily mediated by various
EMT-inducing transcription factors that suppress E-cadherin expression, including
SLUG and ZEB1. miR-200 family expression can reverse EMT by suppressing EMT-
inducing transcription factors. Obviously, more data demonstrating the clinical
relevance of EMT in lung cancer are required, and further elucidation of how EMT 
is regulated in lung cancer will enable us to develop novel therapeutics that
specifically target molecules with critical roles in EMT.

© 2012 The Authors. Respirology © 2012 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

PMID: 22452538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033204. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Meta-profiles of gene expression during aging: limited similarities between mouse
and human and an unexpectedly decreased inflammatory signature.

Swindell WR(1), Johnston A, Sun L, Xing X, Fisher GJ, Bulyk ML, Elder JT,
Gudjonsson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States of America. wswindell@genetics.med.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Skin aging is associated with intrinsic processes that compromise the
structure of the extracellular matrix while promoting loss of functional and
regenerative capacity. These processes are accompanied by a large-scale shift in 
gene expression, but underlying mechanisms are not understood and conservation of
these mechanisms between humans and mice is uncertain.
RESULTS: We used genome-wide expression profiling to investigate the aging skin
transcriptome. In humans, age-related shifts in gene expression were
sex-specific. In females, aging increased expression of transcripts associated
with T-cells, B-cells and dendritic cells, and decreased expression of genes in
regions with elevated Zeb1, AP-2 and YY1 motif density. In males, however, these 
effects were contrasting or absent. When age-associated gene expression patterns 
in human skin were compared to those in tail skin from CB6F1 mice, overall
human-mouse correspondence was weak. Moreover, inflammatory gene expression
patterns were not induced with aging of mouse tail skin, and well-known aging
biomarkers were in fact decreased (e.g., Clec7a, Lyz1 and Lyz2). These unexpected
patterns and weak human-mouse correspondence may be due to decreased abundance of
antigen presenting cells in mouse tail skin with age.
CONCLUSIONS: Aging is generally associated with a pro-inflammatory state, but we 
have identified an exception to this pattern with aging of CB6F1 mouse tail skin.
Aging therefore does not uniformly heighten inflammatory status across all mouse 
tissues. Furthermore, we identified both intercellular and intracellular
mechanisms of transcriptome aging, including those that are sex- and
species-specific.

PMCID: PMC3296693
PMID: 22413003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2012 Jun;29(5):457-69. doi: 10.1007/s10585-012-9463-7. Epub 
2012 Mar 10.

miR-200c inhibits invasion and migration in human colon cancer cells SW480/620 by
targeting ZEB1.

Chen ML(1), Liang LS, Wang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Affiliated First People's Municipal Hospital of
Guang Zhou, Guang Zhou Medical College, No. 602, Ren Min Bei Road, Guang Zhou
510180, Guang Dong, People's Republic of China. chenmianling@sina.com

MicroRNAs are a class of 22-nt noncoding single-strand RNAs regulating gene
expression postscriptionally. Metastasis caused poor prognosis in colorectal
cancer patients and half of the patients developed metastatic lesions when
admission. Here we investigated the possible roles of microRNAs in regulating
metastasis in the paired colon cancer cells SW480 and SW620. Among those
dysregulated microRNAs, miR-200c was speculated to inhibit metastasis by
targeting ZEB1. Overexpression of miR-200c was concurrent with downregulation of 
ZEB1 mRNA and protein. Functional assays demonstrated that modulation of miR-200c
with mimics or inhibitors changed potential of metastasis in SW480/620 cancer
cells in vitro. Taken together, our study demonstrated that miR-200c inhibits
metastatic ability by targeting ZEB1 in colon cancer cells SW480/620 and
suggested that modulation of miR-200c could serve as therapeutic tool for
inhibiting metastasis in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 22407310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Vet Comp Oncol. 2013 Sep;11(3):169-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5829.2011.00313.x.
Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition as a fundamental mechanism underlying the
cancer phenotype.

Cervantes-Arias A(1), Pang LY, Argyle DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and Roslin Institute, The University
of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian, UK. A.Cervantes-Arias@sms.ed.ac.uk

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a complex process involved in
embryonic development, wound healing and carcinogenesis. During this process,
epithelial cells lose their defining characteristics and acquire mesenchymal
properties: loss of cell-cell adhesion; increased motility and invasiveness;
resistance to apoptosis and changes in cellular morphology. EMT has been
implicated as a driver of metastasis and tumour invasion, as this process allows 
cells to detach from their niche and migrate through blood and lymphatic vessels 
to invade different organs. This transition involves a diverse range of
transcription factors, including Twist, Snail and ZEB1, and downstream
transcriptional targets, including E-cadherin, ß-catenin, fibronectin and
vimentin. Recent evidence indicates that cancer stem cells are required for
metastatic tumours to become established at a distant site, and that cancer cells
undergoing EMT may develop stem-cell characteristics as well as increased
invasive potential. The role of EMT in cancer biology is newly emerging in the
human field, and to date very little has been done in veterinary medicine. EMT
may therefore be an important molecular determinant of tumour metastasis, and
further understanding of this process may lead to novel drug targets to be
exploited in both veterinary and human medicine.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 22404947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Lab Invest. 2012 May;92(5):676-87. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.201. Epub 2012 Mar
5.

Wnt signaling induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition with proliferation in
ARPE-19 cells upon loss of contact inhibition.

Chen HC(1), Zhu YT, Chen SY, Tseng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Tech, R&D Ocular Surface Center, Ocular Surface Research and Education 
Foundation, Miami, FL 33173, USA.

Proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of the retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE) are hallmarks of proliferative vitreoretinopathy. This study
aims at clarifying the role of growth factors, such as epidermal growth factor
(EGF), fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2), and transforming growth factor-ß1
(TGF-ß1), in controlling how RPE proliferates while undergoing EMT. When contact 
inhibition of post-confluent ARPE-19 cells was disrupted by EGTA, an increase of 
BrdU labeling was noted only in the presence of EGF and/or FGF-2, and was
accompanied by EMT as evidenced by the loss of a normal RPE phenotype (altered
cytolocalization of RPE65, N-cadherin, ZO-1, and Na,K-ATPase) and the gain of a
mesenchymal phenotype (increased expression of vimentin, S100A4, and a-smooth
muscle actin). EMT with proliferation by EGTA+EGF+FGF-2 was accompanied by
activation of canonical Wnt signaling (judged by the TCF/LEF promoter activity,
increased nuclear levels of and interaction between ß-catenin and LEF1 proteins, 
and the replication by overexpression of ß-catenin), abolished by concomitant
addition of XAV939, a Wnt inhibitor, but not associated with suppression of Hippo
signaling (negative expression of nuclear TAZ or YAP and cytoplasmic p-TAZ or
p-YAP). The causative role of Wnt signaling on EMT with proliferation was
confirmed by overexpression of stable S33Y ß-catenin with EGTA treatment. In
addition, contact inhibition disrupted by EGTA in the presence of TGF-ß1 also led
to EMT, but suppressed proliferation and Wnt signaling. The Wnt signaling
triggered by EGF+FGF-2 was sufficient and synergized with TGF-ß1 in activating
the Smad/ZEB1/2 signaling responsible for EMT. These findings establish a
framework for further dissecting how RPE might partake in a number of
proliferative vitreoretinopathies characterized by EMT.

PMCID: PMC3961713
PMID: 22391957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Pediatr Res. 2012 Apr;71(4 Pt 1):393-8. doi: 10.1038/pr.2011.49. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Androgen receptor is overexpressed in boys with severe hypospadias, and ZEB1
regulates androgen receptor expression in human foreskin cells.

Qiao L(1), Tasian GE, Zhang H, Cao M, Ferretti M, Cunha GR, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Department of Urology, USA.

INTRODUCTION: ZEB1 is overexpressed in patients with severe hypospadias. We
examined the interaction between ZEB1 and the androgen receptor (AR) in vitro and
the expression of AR in boys with hypospadias.
RESULTS: ZEB1 and AR colocalize to the nucleus. Estrogen upregulated ZEB1 and AR 
expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) demonstrated that ZEB1 binds to 
an E-box sequence in the AR gene promoter. AR expression is higher in subjects
with severe hypospadias than those with mild hypospadias and control subjects (P 
< 0.05). ZEB1 physically interacts with AR in human foreskin cells.
DISCUSSION: AR is overexpressed in patients with severe hypospadias.
Environmental estrogenic compounds may increase the risk of hypospadias by
facilitating the interaction between ZEB1 and AR.
METHODS: Hs68 cells, a fibroblast cell line derived from neonatal human foreskin,
were exposed to 0, 10, and 100 nmol/l of estrogen, after which the cellular
localization of ZEB1 and AR was assessed using immunocytochemistry. To determine 
if ZEB1 interacted with the AR gene, ChIP was performed using ZEB1 antibody and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for AR. Second, AR expression was quantified
using real-time PCR and western blot in normal subjects (n = 32), and subjects
with mild (n = 16) and severe hypospadia (n = 16).

PMCID: PMC3423458
PMID: 22391641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nat Med. 2012 Mar 4;18(4):529-37. doi: 10.1038/nm.2645.

Tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 promotes breast cancer progression and maintains
tumor-initiating cells via activation of key transcription factors and a positive
feedback signaling loop.

Aceto N(1), Sausgruber N, Brinkhaus H, Gaidatzis D, Martiny-Baron G, Mazzarol G, 
Confalonieri S, Quarto M, Hu G, Balwierz PJ, Pachkov M, Elledge SJ, van Nimwegen 
E, Stadler MB, Bentires-Alj M.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2012;14(5):321.

New cancer therapies are likely to arise from an in-depth understanding of the
signaling networks influencing tumor initiation, progression and metastasis. We
show a fundamental role for Src-homology 2 domain-containing phosphatase 2 (SHP2)
in these processes in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive
and triple-negative breast cancers. Knockdown of SHP2 eradicated breast
tumor-initiating cells in xenograft models, and SHP2 depletion also prevented
invasion in three-dimensional cultures and in a transductal invasion assay in
vivo. Notably, SHP2 knockdown in established breast tumors blocked their growth
and reduced metastasis. Mechanistically, SHP2 activated stemness-associated
transcription factors, including v-myc myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog
(c-Myc) and zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), which resulted in the
repression of let-7 microRNA and the expression of a set of 'SHP2 signature'
genes. We found these genes to be simultaneously activated in a large subset of
human primary breast tumors that are associated with invasive behavior and poor
prognosis. These results provide new insights into the signaling cascades
influencing tumor-initiating cells as well as a rationale for targeting SHP2 in
breast cancer.

PMID: 22388088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2012 Jun;10(2):106-13. doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2012.01.001.
Epub 2012 Mar 3.

Expression of microRNAs in the urine of patients with bladder cancer.

Wang G(1), Chan ES, Kwan BC, Li PK, Yip SK, Szeto CC, Ng CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China.

We quantified the urine sediment and supernatant levels of microRNA (miRNA)
targets related to epithelial-mesenchymal transition in 51 patients with bladder 
cancer and in 24 controls. We found that patients with bladder cancer had
depressed levels of the miR-200 family, miR-192, and miR-155 in urinary sediment.
The urinary level of these miRNAs may be developed as noninvasive markers for
bladder cancer.BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNA) have been implicated to play an
important role in the pathogenesis of a variety of cancers. We studied the levels
of miRNAs related to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the urine of
patients with bladder cancer.
METHOD: The expression of the miR-200 family, miR-205, miR-192, miR-155, and
miR-146a in the urine sediment and supernatant of 51 patients with bladder cancer
and in 24 controls was determined by real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: Compared with controls, the patients with bladder cancer had a lower
expression of the miR-200 family, miR-192, and miR-155 in the urinary sediment;
lower expression of miR-192; and higher expression of miR-155 in the urinary
supernatant. The expression of the miR-200 family, miR-205, and miR-192 in the
urine sediment significantly correlated with urinary expression of EMT markers,
including zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1, vimentin, transforming growth
factor ß1, and Ras homolog gene family, member A. Furthermore, the levels of
miR-200c and miR-141 in the urine sediment became normalized after surgery.
CONCLUSION: We found that the urinary miR-200 family, miR-155, miR-192, and
miR-205 levels are depressed in patients with bladder cancer. The level of these 
miRNA targets in urine has the potential to be developed as noninvasive markers
for bladder cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22386240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32449. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032449. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Cooperation of p300 and PCAF in the control of microRNA 200c/141 transcription
and epithelial characteristics.

Mizuguchi Y(1), Specht S, Lunz JG 3rd, Isse K, Corbitt N, Takizawa T, Demetris
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas E Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) not only occurs during embryonic
development and in response to injury, but is an important element in cancer
progression. EMT and its reverse process, mesenchymal to epithelial transition
(MET) is controlled by a network of transcriptional regulators and can be
influenced by posttranscriptional and posttranslational modifications. EMT/MET
involves many effectors that can activate and repress these transitions, often
yielding a spectrum of cell phenotypes. Recent studies have shown that the
miR-200 family and the transcriptional suppressor ZEB1 are important contributors
to EMT. Our previous data showed that forced expression of SPRR2a was a powerful 
inducer of EMT and supports the findings by others that SPRR gene members are
highly upregulated during epithelial remodeling in a variety of organs. Here,
using SPRR2a cells, we characterize the role of acetyltransferases on the
microRNA-200c/141 promoter and their effect on the epithelial/mesenchymal status 
of the cells. We show that the deacetylase inhibitor TSA as well as P300 and PCAF
can cause a shift towards epithelial characteristics in HUCCT-1-SPRR2a cells. We 
demonstrate that both P300 and PCAF act as cofactors for ZEB1, forming a
P300/PCAF/ZEB1 complex on the miR200c/141 promoter. This binding results in
lysine acetylation of ZEB1 and a release of ZEB1 suppression on miR-200c/141
transcription. Furthermore, disruption of P300 and PCAF interactions dramatically
down regulates miR-200c/141 promoter activity, indicating a PCAF/P300 cooperative
function in regulating the transcriptional suppressor/activator role of ZEB1.
These data demonstrate a novel mechanism of miRNA regulation in mediating cell
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3284570
PMID: 22384255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cancer Res. 2012 May 1;72(9):2440-53. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-4038. Epub
2012 Feb 29.

Suppression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition by Grainyhead-like-2.

Cieply B(1), Riley P 4th, Pifer PM, Widmeyer J, Addison JB, Ivanov AV, Denvir J, 
Frisch SM.

Author information: 
(1)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West
Virginia 26506, USA.

Grainyhead genes are involved in wound healing and developmental neural tube
closure. In light of the high degree of similarity between the
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) occurring in wound-healing processes and
the cancer stem cell-like compartment of tumors, including TGF-ß dependence, we
investigated the role of the Grainyhead gene, Grainyhead-like-2 (GRHL2) in
oncogenic EMT. GRHL2 was downregulated specifically in the claudin-low subclass
breast tumors and in basal-B subclass breast cancer cell lines. GRHL2 suppressed 
TGF-ß-induced, Twist-induced or spontaneous EMT, enhanced anoikis sensitivity,
and suppressed mammosphere generation in mammary epithelial cells. These effects 
were mediated in part by suppression of ZEB1 expression via direct repression of 
the ZEB1 promoter. GRHL2 also inhibited Smad-mediated transcription and it
upregulated mir-200b/c as well as the TGF-ß receptor antagonist, BMP2. Finally,
ectopic expression of GRHL2 in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells triggered an MET
and restored sensitivity to anoikis. Taken together, our findings define a major 
role for GRHL2 in the suppression of oncogenic EMT in breast cancer cells.

©2012 AACR

PMCID: PMC3342427
PMID: 22379025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cell Cycle. 2012 Mar 15;11(6):1081-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.6.19508. Epub 2012 Mar
15.

Vitamin D has wide regulatory effects on histone demethylase genes.

Pereira F(1), Barbáchano A, Singh PK, Campbell MJ, Muñoz A, Larriba MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto 
Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Vitamin D from the diet or synthesized in the skin upon UV-B irradiation is
converted in the organism into the active metabolite 1a,25- dihydroxyvitamin D 3 
[1,25(OH) 2D 3, calcitriol], a pleiotropic hormone with wide regulatory actions. 
The classical model of 1,25(OH)2D3 action implies the activation of the vitamin D
receptor, which binds specific DNA sequences in its target genes and modulates
their transcription rate. We have recently shown that 1,25(OH) 2D 3 induces the
expression of the JMJD3 gene coding for a histone demethylase that is involved in
epigenetic regulation. JMJD3 mediates the effects of 1,25(OH) 2D 3 on a subset of
target genes and affects the expression of ZEB1, ZEB2 and SNAI1, inducers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Novel data indicate that 1,25(OH) 2D 3 has an 
unanticipated wide regulatory action on the expression of genes coding for
histone demethylases of the Jumonji C (JmjC) domain and lysine-specific
demethylase (LSD) families. Moreover, JMJD3 knockdown decreases the expression of
miR-200b and miR-200c, two microRNAs targeting ZEB1 RNA. This may explain the
upregulation of this transcription factor found in JMJD3-depleted cells. Thus,
1,25(OH) 2D 3 exerts an ample regulatory effect on the expression of
histone-modifying enzymes involved in epigenetic regulation that may mediate its 
actions on gene transcription and cell phenotype.

PMID: 22370479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031584. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Caucasian and Asian specific rheumatoid arthritis risk loci reveal limited
replication and apparent allelic heterogeneity in north Indians.

Prasad P(1), Kumar A, Gupta R, Juyal RC, Thelma BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Delhi, South Campus, New Delhi, India.

Genome-wide association studies and meta-analysis indicate that several
genes/loci are consistently associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in European
and Asian populations. To evaluate the transferability status of these findings
to an ethnically diverse north Indian population, we performed a replication
analysis. We investigated the association of 47 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) at 43 of these genes/loci with RA in a north Indian cohort comprising 983 
RA cases and 1007 age and gender matched controls. Genotyping was done using
Infinium human 660w-quad. Association analysis by chi-square test implemented in 
plink was carried out in two steps. Firstly, association of the index or
surrogate SNP (r2>0.8, calculated from reference GIH Hap-Map population) was
tested. In the second step, evidence for allelic/locus heterogeneity at
aforementioned genes/loci was assessed for by testing additional flanking SNPs in
linkage equilibrium with index/surrogate marker.Of the 44 European specific index
SNPs, neither index nor surrogate SNPs were present for nine SNPs in the
genotyping array. Of the remaining 35, associations were replicated at seven
genes namely PTPN22 (rs1217407, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>3×10(-3)); IL2-21 (rs13119723, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008);
HLA-DRB1 (rs660895, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.56×10(-5); rs6457617, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.6×10(-09); rs13192471,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.7×10(-16)); TNFA1P3 (rs9321637, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03); CCL21 (rs13293020, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01);
IL2RA (rs2104286, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.9×10(-4)) and ZEB1 (rs2793108, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006). Of the three
Asian specific loci tested, rs2977227 in PADI4 showed modest association
(p<0.02). Further, of the 140 SNPs (in LE with index/surrogate variant) tested,
association was observed at 11 additional genes: PTPRC, AFF3, CD28, CTLA4, PXK,
ANKRD55, TAGAP, CCR6, BLK, CD40 and IL2RB. This study indicates limited
replication of European and Asian index SNPs and apparent allelic heterogeneity
in RA etiology among north Indians warranting independent GWAS in this
population. However, replicated associations of HLA-DRB1, PTPN22 (which confer
~50% of the heritable risk to RA) and IL2RA suggest that cross-ethnicity fine
mapping of such loci is apposite for identification of causal variants.

PMCID: PMC3280307
PMID: 22355377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Histochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;137(6):791-800. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-0930-7.
Epub 2012 Feb 18.

BMP4 signaling mediates Zeb family in developing mouse tooth.

Shin JO(1), Kim EJ, Cho KW, Nakagawa E, Kwon HJ, Cho SW, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Research Center for Orofacial Hard Tissue Regeneration, Brain Korea 21 Project,
Oral Science Research Center, College of Dentistry, Yonsei University, 50
Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-752, Korea.

Tooth morphogenesis is regulated by sequential and reciprocal interaction between
oral epithelium and neural-crest-derived ectomesenchyme. The interaction is
controlled by various signal molecules such as bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), 
Hedgehog, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), and Wnt. Zeb family is known as a
transcription factor, which is essential for neural development and
neural-crest-derived tissues, whereas the role of the Zeb family in tooth
development remains unclear. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the
expression profiles of Zeb1 and Zeb2 during craniofacial development focusing on 
mesenchyme of palate, hair follicle, and tooth germ from E12.5 to E16.5. In
addition, we examined the interaction between Zeb family and BMP4 during tooth
development. Both Zeb1 and Zeb2 were expressed at mesenchyme of the palate, hair 
follicle, and tooth germ throughout the stages. In the case of tooth germ at the 
cap stage, the expression of Zeb1 and Zeb2 was lost in epithelium-separated
dental mesenchyme. However, the expression of Zeb1 and Zeb2 in the dental
mesenchyme was recovered by Bmp4 signaling via BMP4-soaked bead and tissue
recombination. Our results suggest that Zeb1 and Zeb2, which were mediated by
BMP4, play an important role in neural-crest-derived craniofacial organ
morphogenesis, such as tooth development.

PMID: 22350174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Aug;69(15):2527-41. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-0935-3. Epub 
2012 Feb 21.

Evolutionary functional analysis and molecular regulation of the ZEB
transcription factors.

Gheldof A(1), Hulpiau P, van Roy F, De Craene B, Berx G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department for Molecular Biomedical
Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.

ZEB1 and ZEB2, which are members of the ZEB family of transcription factors, play
a pivotal role in the development of the vertebrate embryo. However, recent
evidence shows that both proteins can also drive the process of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition during malignant cancer progression. The
understanding of how both ZEBs act as transcription factors opens up new
possibilities for future treatment of advanced carcinomas. This review gives
insight into the molecular mechanisms that form the basis of the multitude of
cellular processes controlled by both ZEB factors. By using an evolutionary
approach, we analyzed how the specific organization of the different domains and 
regulatory sites in ZEB1 and ZEB2 came into existence. On the basis of this
analysis, a detailed overview is provided of the different cofactors and
post-translational mechanisms that are associated with ZEB protein functionality.

PMID: 22349261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Jul;19 Suppl 3:S656-64. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2217-6. Epub
2012 Feb 4.

MicroRNA-200b regulates cell proliferation, invasion, and migration by directly
targeting ZEB2 in gastric carcinoma.

Kurashige J(1), Kamohara H, Watanabe M, Hiyoshi Y, Iwatsuki M, Tanaka Y,
Kinoshita K, Saito S, Baba Y, Baba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The microRNA-200 (miR-200) family has been reported to induce
epithelial differentiation and suppress epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
by inhibiting translation of zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox (ZEB) 1 and 2
mRNAs in several types of cancers. This study aimed to clarify the role of
miR-200b in regulating EMT and promoting cellular proliferation, invasion, and
migration in gastric cancer.
METHODS: The relationships among the expression levels of miR-200b, ZEB1 and
ZEB2, and E-cadherin mRNAs were analyzed by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction in frozen tissue samples from 40 gastric 
cancer patients who underwent gastrectomy from 2008 to 2010. The effects of
miR-200b on EMT in gastric cancer cells in vitro were also analyzed.
RESULTS: Diffuse histologic type, depth of tumor, tumor size, lymph node
metastasis, and lymphatic invasion were significantly higher in the low-miR-200b 
expression group compared with the high expression group. There was a strong
correlation between the levels of miR-200b, and ZEB2 and E-cadherin mRNAs in
gastric cancer patients. Upregulation of miR-200b in gastric cancer cells changed
the cell morphology from fibroblast- to epithelial-like, associated with
localization of E-cadherin to the plasma membrane. ZEB2 mRNA levels fell, while
E-cadherin expression levels increased in gastric cells overexpressing miR-200b, 
associated with significantly reduced cellular proliferation, and inhibition of
cellular migration and invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-200b regulates ZEB2 expression and thus controls metastasis in
gastric cancer.

PMID: 22311119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jul;134(1):207-17. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-1969-9.

The miRNA-200 family and miRNA-9 exhibit differential expression in primary
versus corresponding metastatic tissue in breast cancer.

Gravgaard KH(1), Lyng MB, Laenkholm AV, Søkilde R, Nielsen BS, Litman T, Ditzel
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, J. B. Winsloewsvej 25, 5000 Odense C,
Denmark.

Metastases are the major cause of cancer-related deaths, but the mechanisms of
the metastatic process remain poorly understood. In recent years, the involvement
of microRNAs (miRNAs) in cancer has become apparent, and the objective of this
study was to identify miRNAs associated with breast cancer progression. Global
miRNA expression profiling was performed on 47 tumor samples from 14 patients
with paired samples from primary breast tumors and corresponding lymph node and
distant metastases using LNA-enhanced miRNA microarrays. The identified miRNA
expression alterations were validated by real-time PCR, and tissue distribution
of the miRNAs was visualized by in situ hybridization. The patients, in which the
miRNA profile of the primary tumor and corresponding distant metastasis clustered
in the unsupervised cluster analysis, showed significantly shorter intervals
between the diagnosis of the primary tumor and distant metastasis (median 1.6
years) compared to those that did not cluster (median 11.3 years) (p<0.003).
Fifteen miRNAs were identified that were significantly differentially expressed
between primary tumors and corresponding distant metastases, including miR-9,
miR-219-5p and four of the five members of the miR-200 family involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Tumor expression of miR-9 and miR-200b were
confirmed using in situ hybridization, which also verified higher expression of
these miRNAs in the distant metastases versus corresponding primary tumors. Our
results demonstrate alterations in miRNA expression at different stages of
disease progression in breast cancer, and suggest a direct involvement of the
miR-200 family and miR-9 in the metastatic process.

PMID: 22294488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 22;31(47):4923-34. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.646. Epub 2012 Jan
30.

SIX1 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colorectal cancer through ZEB1
activation.

Ono H(1), Imoto I, Kozaki K, Tsuda H, Matsui T, Kurasawa Y, Muramatsu T, Sugihara
K, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has a major role in cancer progression,
as well as normal organ development and human pathology such as organ fibrosis
and wound healing. Here, we performed a gene expression array specialized in EMT 
of colorectal cancer (CRC). From a comprehensive gene expression analysis using
epithelial- and mesenchymal-like CRC cell lines, and following the ontology (GO) 
analysis, SIX1 gene was identified to be an EMT-related gene in CRC. Using SW480 
cells stably transfected with a SIX1 expression construct and their control
counterparts, we demonstrated that SIX1 overexpression represses CDH1 expression 
and promotes EMT in CRC. SIX1-induced CDH1 repression and EMT in CRC cells were
correlated at least in part with posttranscriptional ZEB1 activation and
miR-200-family transcriptional repression. In primary tumors of CRC, in accord
with the functional findings, aberrant expression of SIX1 in cancer cells was
observed at the disruption of the basement membrane and at the tumor invasive
front, where tumor cells underwent EMT in vivo. Taken together, SIX1
overexpression is suggested to occur in carcinogenesis, and contribute to
repression of CDH1 expression and promotion of EMT partly through repression of
miR-200-family expression and activation of ZEB1 in CRC.

PMID: 22286765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Gen Virol. 2012 May;93(Pt 5):1059-64. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.038661-0. Epub 2012
Jan 25.

Lytic Epstein-Barr virus infection in epithelial cells but not in B-lymphocytes
is dependent on Blimp1.

Buettner M(1), Lang A, Tudor CS, Meyer B, Cruchley A, Barros MH, Farrell PJ, Jäck
HM, Schuh W, Niedobitek G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) replicates in superficial differentiated cells of oral
hairy leukoplakia (OHL). Differentiation of squamous epithelial cells depends on 
B-lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (Blimp1). Here we show that expression 
of the EBV immediate-early protein BZLF1 is restricted to Blimp1-positive
epithelial cells in OHL. Luciferase assays revealed Blimp1-dependent induction of
the BZLF1 promoter Zp in epithelial cell lines. Expression of ZEB1, a negative
regulator of Zp, and of Xbp-1, which mediates the Blimp1 effect on Zp in B-cells,
was not affected by enforced Blimp1 expression. Moreover, Xbp-1 protein
expression was not detected in differentiated epithelial cells of OHL. Thus,
Blimp1 induces BZLF1 expression in epithelial cells independently of ZEB1 and
Xbp-1. In contrast to epithelial cells of OHL, BZLF1 expression was also observed
in Blimp1-negative lymphoid cells in infectious mononucleosis tonsils, suggesting
that EBV replication in B-cells may be induced independently of terminal
differentiation.

PMID: 22278826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 8;31(45):4778-88. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.632. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

ETV5 cooperates with LPP as a sensor of extracellular signals and promotes EMT in
endometrial carcinomas.

Colas E(1), Muinelo-Romay L, Alonso-Alconada L, Llaurado M, Monge M, Barbazan J, 
Gonzalez M, Schoumacher M, Pedrola N, Ertekin T, Devis L, Ruiz A, Castellvi J,
Doll A, Gil-Moreno A, Vazquez-Levin M, Lapyckyj L, Lopez-Lopez R, Robine S,
Friederich E, Castro M, Reventos J, Vignjevic D, Abal M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Unit, Research Institute Vall d'Hebron University
Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most frequent among infiltrating tumors of the 
female genital tract, with myometrial invasion representing an increase in the
rate of recurrences and a decrease in survival. We have previously described ETV5
transcription factor associated with myometrial infiltration in human ECs. In
this work, we further investigated ETV5 orchestrating downstream effects to
confer the tumor the invasive capabilities needed to disseminate in the early
stages of EC dissemination. Molecular profiling evidenced ETV5 having a direct
role on epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In particular, ETV5 modulated
Zeb1 expression and E-Cadherin repression leading to a complete reorganization of
cell-cell and cell-substrate contacts. ETV5-promoted EMT resulted in the
acquisition of migratory and invasive capabilities in endometrial cell lines.
Furthermore, we identified the lipoma-preferred partner protein as a regulatory
partner of ETV5, acting as a sensor for extracellular signals promoting tumor
invasion. All together, we propose ETV5-transcriptional regulation of the EMT
process through a crosstalk with the tumor surrounding microenvironment, as a
principal event initiating EC invasion.

PMID: 22266854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochem J. 2012 Apr 15;443(2):407-16. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111861.

Transforming growth factor ß1 represses proximal tubular cell microRNA-192
expression through decreased hepatocyte nuclear factor DNA binding.

Jenkins RH(1), Martin J, Phillips AO, Bowen T, Fraser DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, UK.

miR (microRNA)-192 plays key roles in renal pathological and physiological
responses, by repressing targets including Zeb1, Zeb2 and Wnk1. In the present
study, we have assessed the regulation of miR-192 expression. We found that
TGF-ß1 (transforming growth factor ß1) down-regulates miR-192 and miR-194,
co-transcribed in the shared precursor pri-miR (primary miR transcript)-192/194. 
Luciferase reporter analysis showed constitutive promoter activity within
nucleotides +21 to -223. We identified HNF (hepatocyte nuclear factor) and p53
binding sites within this region that were required for constitutive promoter
activity, which was decreased by TGF-ß1 through an Alk5-dependent mechanism.
TGF-ß1 treatment decreased HNF binding to the miR-194-2/192 promoter, whereas
knockdown of HNF-1 inhibited mature miR-192 and miR-194 expression. miR-192,
miR-194 and HNF expression were restricted to a defined subset of human tissues
including kidney, small intestine, colon and liver. Our results from the present 
study identify co-ordinated regulation of miR-192 and miR-194, with binding of
HNF and p53 transcription factors necessary for activation of transcription, and 
TGF-ß1-mediated repression through decreased HNF binding to its cognate promoter 
element.

PMID: 22264233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 9;287(11):7896-906. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.313759. Epub 2012
Jan 19.

Induction of ZEB proteins by inactivation of RB protein is key determinant of
mesenchymal phenotype of breast cancer.

Arima Y(1), Hayashi H, Sasaki M, Hosonaga M, Goto TM, Chiyoda T, Kuninaka S,
Shibata T, Ohata H, Nakagama H, Taya Y, Saya H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, School
of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012 May;12(5):581-4.

We previously showed that depletion of the retinoblastoma protein (RB) induces
down-regulation of the adhesion molecule E-cadherin and thereby triggers the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. To further characterize the effect of RB
inactivation on the phenotype of cancer cells, we have now examined RB expression
in human breast cancer cell lines and clinical specimens. We found that
RB-inactive cells exhibit a mesenchymal-like morphology and are highly invasive. 
We also found that ZEB proteins, transcriptional repressors of the E-cadherin
gene, are markedly up-regulated in these cells in a manner sensitive to the
miR-200 family of microRNAs. Moreover, depletion of ZEB in RB-inactive cells
suppressed cell invasiveness and proliferation and induced epithelial marker
expression. These results implicate ZEB in induction of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, as well as in maintenance of the mesenchymal
phenotype in RB-inactive cells. We also developed a screening program for
inhibitors of ZEB1 expression and thereby identified several cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors that blocked both ZEB1 expression and RB phosphorylation.
Together, our findings suggest that RB inactivation contributes to tumor
progression not only through loss of cell cycle control but also through
up-regulation of ZEB expression and induction of an invasive phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3318741
PMID: 22262832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Histochem Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;137(4):459-70. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-0915-6. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

miR-200b regulates cell migration via Zeb family during mouse palate development.

Shin JO(1), Nakagawa E, Kim EJ, Cho KW, Lee JM, Cho SW, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Research Center for Orofacial Hard Tissue Regeneration, Oral Science Research
Center, College of Dentistry, Yonsei University, Seodaemoon-Gu, Seoul, Korea.

Palate development requires coordinating proper cellular and molecular events in 
palatogenesis, including the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), apoptosis, 
cell proliferation, and cell migration. Zeb1 and Zeb2 regulate epithelial
cadherin (E-cadherin) and EMT during organogenesis. While microRNA 200b
(miR-200b) is known to be a negative regulator of Zeb1 and Zeb2 in cancer
progression, its regulatory effects on Zeb1 and Zeb2 in palatogenesis have not
yet been clarified. The aim of this study is to investigate the relationship
between the regulators of palatal development, specifically, miR-200b and the Zeb
family. Expression of both Zeb1 and Zeb2 was detected in the mesenchyme of the
mouse palate, while miR-200b was expressed in the medial edge epithelium. After
contact with the palatal shelves, miR-200b was expressed in the palatal
epithelial lining and epithelial island around the fusion region but not in the
palatal mesenchyme. The function of miR-200b was examined by overexpression via a
lentiviral vector in the palatal shelves. Ectopic expression of miR-200b resulted
in suppression of the Zeb family, upregulation of E-cadherin, and changes in cell
migration and palatal fusion. These results suggest that miR-200b plays crucial
roles in cell migration and palatal fusion by regulating Zeb1 and Zeb2 as a
noncoding RNA during palate development.

PMID: 22261924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Oncogene. 2012 Oct 25;31(43):4619-29. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.612. Epub 2012 Jan
16.

SIRT1 induces EMT by cooperating with EMT transcription factors and enhances
prostate cancer cell migration and metastasis.

Byles V(1), Zhu L, Lovaas JD, Chmilewski LK, Wang J, Faller DV, Dai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center and Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial program for the
invasion and metastasis of epithelial tumors that involves loss of cell-cell
adhesion and increased cell mobility; however, mechanisms underlying this
transition are not fully elucidated. Here, we propose a novel mechanism through
which the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent histone deacetylase SIRT1
regulates EMT in prostate cancer cells through cooperation with the EMT inducing 
transcription factor ZEB1. We found that forced expression of SIRT1 in
non-transformed PZ-HPV-7 prostate epithelial cells disrupts the epithelial
morphology concomitant with decreased expression of the epithelial marker,
E-cadherin, and increased expression of mesenchymal markers. In contrast,
silencing SIRT1 in metastatic prostate tumor cells restores cell-cell adhesion
and induces a shift toward an epithelial morphology concomitant with increased
expression of E-cadherin and decreased expression of mesenchymal markers. We also
found that SIRT1 has a physiologically relevant role in endogenous EMT induced by
EGF signaling in prostate cancer cells. We propose that the regulation of EMT by 
SIRT1 involves modulation of, and cooperation with, the EMT inducing
transcription factor ZEB1. Specifically, we show that SIRT1 silencing reduces
expression of ZEB1 and that SIRT1 is recruited to the E-cadherin proximal
promoter by ZEB1 to deacetylate histone H3 and to reduce binding of RNA
polymerase II, ultimately suppressing E-cadherin transcription. We thus identify 
a necessary role for ZEB1 in SIRT1-mediated EMT. Finally, we show that reduction 
of SIRT1 decreases prostate cancer cell migration in vitro and metastasis in vivo
in immunodeficient mice, which is largely independent of any general effects of
SIRT1 on prostate cancer growth and survival. We therefore identify SIRT1 as a
positive regulator of EMT and metastatic growth of prostate cancer cells and our 
findings implicate overexpressed SIRT1 as a potential therapeutic target to
reverse EMT and to prevent prostate cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4157820
PMID: 22249256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Mar;32(3):721-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.241109. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Pro-inflammatory role of microrna-200 in vascular smooth muscle cells from
diabetic mice.

Reddy MA(1), Jin W, Villeneuve L, Wang M, Lanting L, Todorov I, Kato M, Natarajan
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1500
East Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) from type 2 diabetic db/db mice
exhibit enhanced proinflammatory responses implicated in accelerated vascular
complications. We examined the role of microRNA(miR)-200 family members and their
target Zeb1, an E-box binding transcriptional repressor, in these events.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-200b, miR-200c, and miR-429
were increased, although protein levels of Zeb1 were decreased in VSMC and aortas
from db/db mice relative to control db/+ mice. Transfection of miR-200 mimics
into VSMC downregulated Zeb1 by targeting its 3'-UTR, upregulated the
inflammatory genes cyclooxygenase-2 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and
promoted monocyte binding in db/+VSMC. In contrast, miR-200 inhibitors reversed
the enhanced monocyte binding of db/dbVSMC. Zeb1 gene silencing with siRNAs also 
increased these proinflammatory responses in db/+VSMC confirming negative
regulatory role of Zeb1. Both miR-200 mimics and Zeb1 siRNAs increased
cyclooxygenase-2 promoter transcriptional activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
showed that Zeb1 occupancy at inflammatory gene promoters was reduced in VSMC
from type 2 diabetic db/db mice. Furthermore, Zeb1 knockdown increased miR-200
levels demonstrating a feedback regulatory loop.
CONCLUSION: Disruption of the reciprocal negative regulatory loop between miR-200
and Zeb1 under diabetic conditions enhances proinflammatory responses of VSMC
implicated in vascular complications.

PMCID: PMC3288534
PMID: 22247255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;72(5):1157-69. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3067. Epub
2012 Jan 11.

Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus promotes endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition through
Notch-dependent signaling.

Gasperini P(1), Espigol-Frigole G, McCormick PJ, Salvucci O, Maric D, Uldrick TS,
Polizzotto MN, Yarchoan R, Tosato G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) is now widely considered a pivotal 
contributor to cancer progression. In this study, we show that the Kaposi's
sarcoma (KS)-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a sufficient cause of EndMT,
potentially helping to explain the aggressiveness of KS that occurs commonly in
AIDS patients. Upon KSHV infection, primary dermal microvascular endothelial
cells lost expression of endothelial markers and acquired expression of
mesenchymal markers, displaying new invasive and migratory properties along with 
increased survival. KSHV activated Notch-induced transcription factors Slug and
ZEB1, and canonical Notch signaling was required for KSHV-induced EndMT. In
contrast, KSHV did not utilize the TGFß signaling pathway, which has also been
linked to EndMT. Within KS lesions, KSHV-infected spindle cells displayed
features compatible with KSHV-induced EndMT including a complex phenotype of
endothelial and mesenchymal properties, Notch activity, and nuclear ZEB1
expression. Our results show that KSHV engages the EndMT program to increase the 
invasiveness and survival of infected endothelial cells, traits that likely
contribute to viral persistence and malignant progression. One important
implication of our findings is that therapeutic approaches to disrupt the Notch
pathway may offer novel approaches for KS treatment.

PMCID: PMC3512101
PMID: 22237624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun;20(6):632-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.248. Epub 2012 Jan 
11.

Association of TCF4 and CLU polymorphisms with Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy and
implication of CLU and TGFBI proteins in the disease process.

Kuot A(1), Hewitt AW, Griggs K, Klebe S, Mills R, Jhanji V, Craig JE, Sharma S,
Burdon KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South
Australia, Australia.

Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy (FED) is a disease affecting the corneal
endothelium. Recent studies reported significant association of polymorphisms in 
the TCF4 (transcription factor 4) gene, and a borderline association of PTPRG
(protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, G) variants with late-onset FED in 
Caucasians from the United States. Association of TCF4 has also been reported in 
the Chinese population. We aimed to determine association of the reported
polymorphisms in TCF4 and PTPRG, and association of polymorphisms in the
candidate genes ZEB1 (zinc-finger E-box binding homoebox 1), COL8A2 (collagen,
type VIII, alpha 2), TGFBI (transforming growth factor, ß-induced) and CLU
(clusterin) in Australian cases. We also compared the expression of TGFBI and CLU
proteins between FED and normal whole corneas. In all, 30 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from the candidate genes were genotyped in 103 cases and 275
controls. Each SNP and haplotype was assessed for association with the disease.
SNP analysis identified an association of TCF4 (rs613872 (P=5.25 × 10(-15),
OR=4.05), rs9954153 (P=3.37 × 10(-7), OR=2.58), rs2286812 (P=4.23 × 10(-6),
OR=2.55) and rs17595731 (P=3.57 × 10(-5), OR=3.79)), CLU (rs17466684; P=0.003,
OR=1.85) and one haplotype of TGFBI SNPs (P=0.011, OR=2.29) with FED in Caucasian
Australians. No evidence for genetic association of PTPRG, ZEB1 and COL8A2 was
found. Immunohistochemistry showed differential expression of CLU and TGFBI
proteins in FED-affected compared with normal corneas. In conclusion, variation
in TCF4, CLU and TGFBI, but not PTPRG, ZEB1 and COL8A2 genes are associated with 
FED in Caucasian Australian cases. Differential expression of CLU and TGFBI
proteins in FED-affected corneas provides novel insights into the disease
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3355250
PMID: 22234156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 6;14(1):R4.

Evidence that GTP-binding domain but not catalytic domain of transglutaminase 2
is essential for epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in mammary epithelial
cells.

Kumar A(1), Xu J, Sung B, Kumar S, Yu D, Aggarwal BB, Mehta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D.,
Anderson Cancer Center, 1901 East Road, 4SCR3,1006, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The expression of proinflammatory protein tissue transglutaminase 2
(TG2) is frequently upregulated in multiple cancer cell types. However, the exact
role of TG2 in cancer cells is not well-understood. We recently initiated studies
to determine the significance of TG2 in cancer cells and observed that sustained 
expression of TG2 resulted in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
promoted cancer stem cell (CSC) traits in mammary epithelial cells. These results
suggested that TG2 could serve as a promising therapeutic target for overcoming
chemoresistance and inhibiting metastatic spread of cancer cells.
METHODS: Using various mutant constructs, we analyzed the activity of TG2 that is
essential for promoting the EMT-CSC phenotype.
RESULTS: Our results suggest that catalytically inactive TG2 (TG2-C277S) is as
effective as wild-type TG2 (TG2-WT) in inducing the EMT-CSC in mammary epithelial
cells. In contrast, overexpression of a GTP-binding-deficient mutant (TG2-R580A) 
was completely incompetent in this regard. Moreover, TG2-dependent activation of 
the proinflammatory transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B is deemed essential for promoting 
the EMT-CSC phenotype in mammary epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the transamidation activity of TG2 is not
essential for promoting its oncogenic functions and provide a strong rationale
for developing small-molecule inhibitors to block GTP-binding pockets of TG2.
Such inhibitors may have great potential for inhibiting the TG2-regulated
pathways, reversing drug resistance and inhibiting the metastasis of cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC3496119
PMID: 22225906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Mar;23(3):458-69. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2011050485. Epub 2012
Jan 5.

Inhibiting microRNA-192 ameliorates renal fibrosis in diabetic nephropathy.

Putta S(1), Lanting L, Sun G, Lawson G, Kato M, Natarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Division of Molecular Diabetes Research, Beckman
Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

TGF-ß1 upregulates microRNA-192 (miR-192) in cultured glomerular mesangial cells 
and in glomeruli from diabetic mice. miR-192 not only increases collagen
expression by targeting the E-box repressors Zeb1/2 but also modulates other
renal miRNAs, suggesting that it may be a therapeutic target for diabetic
nephropathy. We evaluated the efficacy of a locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified
inhibitor of miR-192, designated LNA-anti-miR-192, in mouse models of diabetic
nephropathy. LNA-anti-miR-192 significantly reduced levels of miR-192, but not
miR-194, in kidneys of both normal and streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. In
the kidneys of diabetic mice, inhibition of miR-192 significantly increased
Zeb1/2 and decreased gene expression of collagen, TGF-ß, and fibronectin;
immunostaining confirmed the downregulation of these mediators of renal fibrosis.
Furthermore, LNA-anti-miR-192 attenuated proteinuria in these diabetic mice. In
summary, the specific reduction of renal miR-192 decreases renal fibrosis and
improves proteinuria, lending support for the possibility of an anti-miRNA-based 
translational approach to the treatment of diabetic nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC3294315
PMID: 22223877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Surg Oncol. 2012 Jun 1;105(7):655-61. doi: 10.1002/jso.23020. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and mesenchymal-epithelial transition via
regulation of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2 expression in pancreatic cancer.

Kurahara H(1), Takao S, Maemura K, Mataki Y, Kuwahata T, Maeda K, Ding Q, Sakoda 
M, Iino S, Ishigami S, Ueno S, Shinchi H, Natsugoe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology and Digestive Surgery, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
h-krhr@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIES: Phenotypic plasticity of cancer cells via
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and mesenchymal-epithelial transition
(MET) is essential for tumor progression and metastasis.METHODS: Tissue samples
were obtained from 76 pancreatic head cancers. We assessed the expression of
E-cadherin, vimentin, ZEB-1, and ZEB-2 by immunohistochemical and
immunofluorescence staining. Next, 147 metastatic lymph nodes from 45 pancreatic 
cancers with low expression of E-cadherin were obtained and divided into two
categories according to the maximum diameter of the metastases: 2 mm or more and 
less than 2 mm.
RESULTS: High expressions of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2 in the primary tumors were
significantly associated with repression of E-cadherin (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0007), and poorer
prognosis (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0322). Forty-three (29.3%) of the 147 metastatic tumors from
pancreatic cancers with low expression of E-cadherin showed high E-cadherin
expression. Cancer cells in the larger metastases showed high expression of
E-cadherin (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0061) and low expression of ZEB-1 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0170) and ZEB-2
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0036) compared with those in the smaller metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: In primary pancreatic tumors and metastatic lymph nodes, high and
low expression of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2 was associated with mesenchymal and epithelial 
phenotype of cancer cells, respectively.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22213144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Surg Oncol. 2012 Jun 15;105(8):830-4. doi: 10.1002/jso.23012. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Overexpression of ZEB1 relates to metastasis and invasion in osteosarcoma.

Shen A(1), Zhang Y, Yang H, Xu R, Huang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Jiangyin People's Hospital, Medical School of
Nantong University, Jiangsu Province, China.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate the expression of ZEB1 in
osteosarcoma tissues and to discuss the relationship between ZEB1 expression and 
osteosarcoma metastasis.
METHODS: Using RT-PCR and Western blotting, the mRNA and protein expressions of
ZEB1 in the osteosarcoma and normal bone tissues were detected. Using the RNA
interference technique, the expression of ZEB1 in the human osteosarcoma MG-63
cell line was downregulated, and the changes in the invasion of MG-63 cells were 
examined.
RESULTS: The positive mRNA expression rate of ZEB1 in the osteosarcoma tissues
was significantly higher than that in normal bone tissue (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The protein 
expression level of ZEB1 in the sarcoma tissues from patients with positive lung 
metastasis was significantly higher than that from patients without lung
metastasis (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). After the transfection of ZEB1 siRNA into the MG-63 cells,
the protein expression of ZEB1 was significantly reduced (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), and the
number of cells that passed through the Transwell chamber was significantly lower
than that in the non-transfected control group as well as the transfected control
group (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The overexpression of ZEB1 in osteosarcoma may be related to the
carcinogenesis and development as well as metastasis and invasion of
osteosarcoma.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22213004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cancer Sci. 2012 Apr;103(4):813-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02199.x. Epub
2012 Feb 3.

Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 promotes vasculogenic mimicry in colorectal 
cancer through induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Liu Z(1), Sun B, Qi L, Li H, Gao J, Leng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tianjin Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, China.

Our previous studies have shown that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may 
be involved in the vasculogenic mimicry (VM) formation in hepatocellular
carcinoma. Here, we hypothesize that zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) 
promotes VM formation in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) by inducing EMT. We
identified VM in 39 (19.2%) out of 203 CRC patients. The presence of VM was
associated with aggressive biological behavior and was an unfavorable prognostic 
indicator. By immunohistochemical analysis, we found that the VM-positive CRC
samples showed increased ZEB1 expression compared with the VM-negative samples
and the ZEB1 expression occurred concomitantly with features of EMT. In vitro,
knockdown of ZEB1 in poorly differentiated HCT116 CRC cells destroyed the
vessel-like structures in the 3-D culture, a property associated with VM
formation. Knockdown of ZEB1 resulted in restoration of epithelial phenotypes and
significantly inhibited the ability to migrate and invade. In addition, ZEB1
underexpression decreased the expression of vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin
and Flk-1, which are characteristics of endothelial cells. Taken together, our
results suggest that ZEB1 can promote VM formation by inducing EMT in CRC and
might represent an important target in CRC.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22212097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Oncogenesis. 2012 Jul 16;1:e20. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2012.20.

Overexpression of ETV4 is oncogenic in prostate cells through promotion of both
cell proliferation and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Pellecchia A(1), Pescucci C, De Lorenzo E, Luceri C, Passaro N, Sica M, Notaro R,
De Angioletti M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Gene Transfer Laboratory, Core Research Laboratory,
Istituto Toscano Tumori, AOUC, Florence, Italy.

The discovery of translocations that involve one of the genes of the ETS family
(ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5) has been a major advance in understanding the
molecular basis of prostate cancer (PC). Each one of these translocations results
in deregulated expression of one of the ETS proteins. Here, we focus on the
mechanism whereby overexpression of the ETV4 gene mediates oncogenesis in the
prostate. By siRNA technology, we show that ETV4 inhibition in the PC3 cancer
cell line reduces not only cell mobility and anchorage-independent growth, but
also cell proliferation, cell cycle progression and tumor growth in a xenograft
model. Conversely, ETV4 overexpression in the nonmalignant human prostate cell
line (RWPE) increases anchorage-independent growth, cell mobility and cell
proliferation, which is probably mediated by downregulation of p21, producing
accelerated progression through the cell cycle. ETV4 overexpression is associated
with changes in the pattern of E-cadherin and N-cadherin expression; the cells
also become spindle-shaped, and these changes are characteristic of the so-called
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In RWPE cells overexpressing ETV4 EMT
results from a marked increase in EMT-specific transcription factors such as
TWIST1, SLUG1, ZEB1 and ZEB2. Thus, whereas ETV4 shares with the other ETS
proteins (ERG, ETV5 and ETV1) a major role in invasiveness and cell migration, it
emerges as unique in that it increases at the same time also the rate of
proliferation of PC cells. Considering the wide spectrum in the clinical course
of patients with PC, it may be highly relevant that ETV4 is capable of inducing
most and perhaps all of the features that make a tumor aggressive.

PMCID: PMC3412649
PMID: 23552736  [PubMed]


237. Oncogenesis. 2012 Jun 11;1:e15. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2012.15.

miR-200b restoration and DNA methyltransferase inhibitor block lung metastasis of
mesenchymal-phenotype hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ding W(1), Dang H, You H, Steinway S, Takahashi Y, Wang HG, Liao J, Stiles B,
Albert R, Rountree CB.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pharmacology, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with poor prognosis and 
metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma. We have previously demonstrated an in
vivo model of liver cancer in which mesenchymal cells post-EMT demonstrate a high
rate of invasive growth and metastasis. Here, we investigate the role of microRNA
200 (miR-200) family members and epigenetic modifications on the maintenance of
mesenchymal/metastatic phenotype after EMT. Mesenchymal cells post-EMT
demonstrates high levels of E-box repressors Zeb1 and Zeb2 and downregulation of 
four miR-200 family members (miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429). In
addition, DNA sequencing after bisulfite modification demonstrates that several
CpG sites within the E-cadherin promoter are methylated in mesenchymal cells. In 
mesenchymal cells, forced expression of miR-200b results in a significant
increase in E-cadherin and a reduction in cell migration/invasion. Despite these 
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) changes in vitro, there is no
significant change in metastatic potential after miR-200b upregulation in vivo.
After the mesenchymal cells were treated with combination of DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor and upregulation of miR-200b, invasive
phenotype was significantly reduced and metastatic potential was eliminated.
Direct targeting of E-cadherin with short hairpin RNA does not restore metastatic
potential after DNMT inhibition and miR-200b re-expression. In addition,
restoration of E-cadherin alone was unable to block metastatic potential in
primary mesenchymal cells. In conclusion, targeting mesenchymal liver cancer
cells with miR-200b and DNMT inhibitor reduces metastatic potential irrespective 
of E-cadherin expression. Thus, the broader differentiation and MET effects of
DNMT inhibition and miR-200b must be considered in terms of rescuing metastatic
potential.

PMCID: PMC3412647
PMID: 23552699  [PubMed]


238. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028688. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

E-cadherin is transcriptionally activated via suppression of ZEB1 transcriptional
repressor by small RNA-mediated gene silencing.

Mazda M(1), Nishi K, Naito Y, Ui-Tei K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

RNA activation has been reported to be induced by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
that act on the promoters of several genes containing E-cadherin. In this study, 
we present an alternative mechanism of E-cadherin activation in human PC-3 cells 
by siRNAs previously reported to possess perfect-complementary sequences to
E-cadherin promoter. We found that activation of E-cadherin can be also induced
via suppression of ZEB1, which is a transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin, by
seed-dependent silencing mechanism of these siRNAs. The functional
seed-complementary sites of the siRNAs were found in the coding region in
addition to the 3' untranslated region of ZEB1 mRNA. Promoter analyses indicated 
that E-boxes, which are ZEB1-binding sites, in the upstream promoter region are
indispensable for E-cadherin transcription by the siRNAs. Thus, the results
caution against ignoring siRNA seed-dependent silencing effects in genome-wide
transcriptional regulation. In addition, members of miR-302/372/373/520 family,
which have the same seed sequences with one of the siRNAs containing
perfect-complementarity to E-cadherin promoter, are also found to activate
E-cadherin transcription. Thus, E-cadherin could be upregulated by the
suppression of ZEB1 transcriptional repressor by miRNAs in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3244408
PMID: 22205962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5819-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.295964. Epub 2011 
Dec 28.

Roles of STAT3 and ZEB1 proteins in E-cadherin down-regulation and human
colorectal cancer epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Xiong H(1), Hong J, Du W, Lin YW, Ren LL, Wang YC, Su WY, Wang JL, Cui Y, Wang
ZH, Fang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Division, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine
Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institution of Digestive Disease, Key Laboratory of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ministry of Health (Shanghai Jiao-Tong
University), 145 Middle Shandong Road, Shanghai 200001, China.

The progression of colorectal carcinoma (CRC) to invasive and metastatic disease 
may involve localized occurrences of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
However, mechanisms of the EMT process in CRC progression are not fully
understood. We previously showed that knockdown of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) up-regulated E-cadherin (a key component in 
EMT progression) in CRC. In this study, we examined the roles of STAT3 in CRC EMT
and ZEB1, an EMT inducer, in STAT3-induced down-regulation of E-cadherin.
Knockdown of STAT3 significantly increased E-cadherin and decreased N-cadherin
and vimentin expressions in highly invasive LoVo CRC cells. Meanwhile,
overexpression of STAT3 significantly reduced E-cadherin and enhanced N-cadherin 
and vimentin expressions in weakly invasive SW1116 CRC cells. Activation of STAT3
significantly increased CRC cell invasiveness and resistance to apoptosis.
Knockdown of STAT3 dramatically enhanced chemosensitivity of CRC cells to
fluorouracil. STAT3 regulated ZEB1 expression in CRC cells, and the STAT3-induced
decrease in E-cadherin and cell invasion depended on activation of ZEB1 in CRC
cells. Additionally, pSTAT3(Tyr-705) and ZEB1 expressions were significantly
correlated with TNM (tumor, lymph node, and metastasis stages) (p < 0.01). In
conclusion, STAT3 may directly mediate EMT progression and regulate ZEB1
expression in CRC. ZEB1 may participate in STAT3-induced cell invasion and
E-cadherin down-regulation in CRC cells. The expressions of pSTAT3(Tyr-705) and
ZEB1 may be positively associated with CRC metastasis. Our data may provide
potential targets to prevent and/or treat CRC invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3285352
PMID: 22205702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Jan 25;53(1):273-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8038.

Analysis of the role of ZEB1 in the pathogenesis of posterior polymorphous
corneal dystrophy.

Yellore VS(1), Rayner SA, Nguyen CK, Gangalum RK, Jing Z, Bhat SP, Aldave AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at the University
of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine how nonsense mutations in the transcription factor ZEB1
lead to the development of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy type 3
(PPCD3).
METHODS: Whole-cell extracts were obtained from cultured human corneal epithelial
cells (HCEpCs) as a source of ZEB1 protein. DNA-binding assays were performed
using the whole-cell extract and oligonucleotide probes consisting of the two
conserved E2-box motifs and surrounding nucleotides upstream of COL4A3. ZEB1 and 
COL4A3 mRNA expression in primary human corneal endothelial cells (HCEnCs) was
assayed in both PPCD3 and control corneas by RT-PCR. Immunohistochemistry was
used to localize ZEB1 and COL4A3 expression in normal human cornea.
RESULTS: Electromobility shift assays (EMSAs) and competition EMSAs demonstrated 
binding of protein(s) in the cultured HCEpCs to the E2-box motifs in the probes. 
The supershift EMSA confirmed that ZEB1, demonstrated to be present in the
whole-cell extracts, binds to both the proximal and distal E2-box motifs in the
COL4A3 promoter region. Both COL4A3 and ZEB1 are expressed in normal HCEnCs,
although in PPCD3, ZEB1 expression is decreased and COL4A3 expression is
increased compared with levels of both genes in healthy control corneas.
CONCLUSIONS: Inversely related HCEnC expression levels of ZEB1 and COL4A3 in
PPCD3 indicate that ZEB1-mediated alterations in COL4A3 expression are most
likely associated with the pathogenesis of this corneal endothelial dystrophy.
However, the demonstration of COL4A3 expression in healthy adult primary HCEnCs
suggests that PPCD3 is more likely to involve an alteration in the timing and/or 
degree of COL4A3 expression than to result from the dichotomous change implied by
the previously proposed ectopic expression model.

PMCID: PMC3292363
PMID: 22199242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Endocrinol. 2011;2011:903918. doi: 10.1155/2011/903918. Epub 2011 Dec 10.

Androgen Receptor Regulates Transcription of the ZEB1 Transcription Factor.

Anose BM(1), Sanders MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The zinc finger E-box binding protein 1 (ZEB1) transcription factor belongs to a 
two-member family of zinc-finger homeodomain proteins involved in physiological
and pathological events mostly relating to cell migration and epithelial to
mesenchymal transitions (EMTs). ZEB1 (also known as dEF1, zfhx1a, TCF8, and
Zfhep) plays a key role in regulating such diverse processes as T-cell
development, skeletal patterning, reproduction, and cancer cell metastasis.
However, the factors that regulate its expression and consequently the signaling 
pathways in which ZEB1 participates are poorly defined. Because it is induced by 
estrogen and progesterone and is high in prostate cancer, we investigated whether
tcf8, which encodes ZEB1, is regulated by androgen. Data herein demonstrate that 
tcf8 is induced by dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in the human PC-3/AR prostate cancer
cell line and that this induction is mediated by two androgen response elements
(AREs). These results demonstrate that ZEB1 is an intermediary in androgen
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3235469
PMID: 22190929  [PubMed]


242. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28294. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028294. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

C-peptide increases Na,K-ATPase expression via PKC- and MAP kinase-dependent
activation of transcription factor ZEB in human renal tubular cells.

Galuska D(1), Pirkmajer S, Barrès R, Ekberg K, Wahren J, Chibalin AV.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Integrative Physiology, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Replacement of proinsulin C-peptide in type 1 diabetes ameliorates
nerve and kidney dysfunction, conditions which are associated with a decrease in 
Na,K-ATPase activity. We determined the molecular mechanism by which long term
exposure to C-peptide stimulates Na,K-ATPase expression and activity in primary
human renal tubular cells (HRTC) in control and hyperglycemic conditions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: HRTC were cultured from the outer cortex obtained
from patients undergoing elective nephrectomy. Ouabain-sensitive rubidium
((86)Rb(+)) uptake and Na,K-ATPase activity were determined. Abundance of
Na,K-ATPase was determined by Western blotting in intact cells or isolated
basolateral membranes (BLM). DNA binding activity was determined by electrical
mobility shift assay (EMSA). Culturing of HRTCs for 5 days with 1 nM, but not 10 
nM of human C-peptide leads to increase in Na,K-ATPase a(1)-subunit protein
expression, accompanied with increase in (86)Rb(+) uptake, both in normal- and
hyperglycemic conditions. Na,K-ATPase a(1)-subunit expression and Na,K-ATPase
activity were reduced in BLM isolated from cells cultured in presence of high
glucose. Exposure to1 nM, but not 10 nM of C-peptide increased PKCe
phosphorylation as well as phosphorylation and abundance of nuclear ERK1/2
regardless of glucose concentration. Exposure to 1 nM of C-peptide increased DNA 
binding activity of transcription factor ZEB (AREB6), concomitant with
Na,K-ATPase a(1)-subunit mRNA expression. Effects of 1 nM C-peptide on
Na,K-ATPase a(1)-subunit expression and/or ZEB DNA binding activity in HRTC were 
abolished by incubation with PKC or MEK1/2 inhibitors and ZEB siRNA silencing.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Despite activation of ERK1/2 and PKC by hyperglycemia, 
a distinct pool of PKCs and ERK1/2 is involved in regulation of Na,K-ATPase
expression and activity by C-peptide. Most likely C-peptide stimulates sodium
pump expression via activation of ZEB, a transcription factor that has not been
previously implicated in C-peptide-mediated signaling. Importantly, only
physiological concentrations of C-peptide elicit this effect.

PMCID: PMC3230608
PMID: 22162761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Reproduction. 2012 Mar;143(3):377-87. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0364. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Expression of mesenchymal-related genes by the bovine trophectoderm following
conceptus attachment to the endometrial epithelium.

Yamakoshi S(1), Bai R, Chaen T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Sakurai T, Konno T, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

In the course of experiments to identify and characterize the factors that
function in bovine conceptuses during peri-attachment periods, various
transcripts related to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were found. In
this study, RNA was extracted from different sets of days 17, 20, and 22 (day
0=day of estrous) bovine conceptuses and subjected to real-time PCR analysis as
well as Western blotting, from which abundances of N-cadherin (CDH2), vimentin,
matrix metalloproteinase 2 (gelatinase A, 72 kDa gelatinase, 72 kDa type IV
collagenase) (MMP2), and matrix metallopeptidase 9 (gelatinase B, 92 kDa
gelatinase, 92 kDa type IV collagenase) (MMP9) mRNAs were determined on day 22,
concurrent with (CDH1) mRNA and protein downregulation. Transcription factors in 
EMT processes were then analyzed and changes in snail homolog 2 (Drosophila)
(SNAI), zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), zinc finger E-box binding
homeobox 2 (ZEB2), twist homolog 1 (Drosophila) (TWIST1), twist homolog 2
(Drosophila) (TWIST2), and Kruppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) transcripts were found in
day 22 conceptuses, while confirming SNAI2 expression by Western blotting.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the day 22 trophectoderm expressed the
mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and vimentin as well as the epithelial marker
cytokeratin. In attempts to identify the molecular mechanisms by which the
trophectoderm expressed EMT-related genes, growth factor receptors associated
with EMT were analyzed. Upregulation of the growth factor receptor transcripts,
fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), platelet-derived growth factor
receptor, alpha polypeptide (PDGFRA), platelet-derived growth factor receptor,
beta polypeptide (PDGFRB), and transforming growth factor, beta receptor II
(70/80 kDa) (TGFBR2) mRNAs, was found on day 22. The analysis was extended to
determine the integrin (ITG) transcripts and found high levels of integrin, alpha
4 (antigen CD49D, alpha 4 subunit of VLA-4 receptor) (ITGA4), integrin, alpha 8
(ITGA8), integrin, beta 3 (platelet glycoprotein IIIa, antigen CD61) (ITGB3), and
integrin, beta 5 (ITGB5) mRNAs on day 22. These observations indicate that after 
the conceptus-endometrium attachment, EMT-related transcripts as well as the
epithelial marker cytokeratin were present in the bovine trophectoderm and
suggest that the implantation process for noninvasive trophoblasts requires not
only extracellular matrix expression but also partial EMT.

PMID: 22157247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):439-48. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300060. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Recruitment of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 by the transcriptional
repressor ZEB1 downregulates E-cadherin expression in pancreatic cancer.

Aghdassi A(1), Sendler M, Guenther A, Mayerle J, Behn CO, Heidecke CD, Friess H, 
Büchler M, Evert M, Lerch MM, Weiss FU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität Greifswald,
Friedrich-Loefler-Str. 23a, 17475 Greifswald, Germany.

Comment in
    Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):329-30.

OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic cancer is characterised by invasive tumour spread and early
metastasis formation. During epithelial-mesenchymal transition, loss of the cell 
adhesion molecule E-cadherin is frequent and can be caused by genetic or
epigenetic modifications, recruitment of transcriptional activators/repressors or
post-translational modifications. A study was undertaken to investigate how
E-cadherin expression in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma and pancreatic cancer
cell lines is regulated.
METHODS: In 25 human pancreatic cancer resection specimens, the coding region of 
the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) was sequenced for somatic mutations. The tumour
samples and 11 established human pancreatic cancer cell lines were analysed by
immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation and
methylation-specific PCR. The role of specific histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi) on pancreatic tumour cell migration and proliferation was studied in
vitro.
RESULTS: Neither somatic mutations nor CDH1 promoter hypermethylation were found 
to be responsible for downregulation of E-cadherin in pancreatic cancer. In the
transcriptionally active CDH1 promoter, acetylation of histones H3 and H4 was
detected whereas HDAC1 and HDAC2 were found attached only to a silent promoter.
Expression of ZEB1, a transcription factor known to recruit HDACs, was seen in
E-cadherin-deficient cell lines in which ZEB1/HDAC complexes were found attached 
to the CDH1 promoter. Moreover, knockdown of ZEB1 prevented HDAC from binding to 
the CDH1 promoter, resulting in histone acetylation and expression of E-cadherin.
HDACi treatment attenuated tumour cell migration and proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings imply an important role for histone deacetylation in 
the downregulation of E-cadherin in human pancreatic cancer. Recruitment of HDACs
to the CDH1 promoter is regulated by the transcription factor ZEB1, and
inhibition of HDACs may be a promising antitumour therapy for pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22147512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):329-30. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301576. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

A ZEB1-HDAC pathway enters the epithelial to mesenchymal transition world in
pancreatic cancer.

Schneider G(1), Krämer OH, Saur D.

Author information: 
(1)II Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany. guenter.schneider@lrz.tum.de

Comment on
    Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):439-48.

PMID: 22147511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;32(3):633-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06212-11. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

MicroRNA-200c represses migration and invasion of breast cancer cells by
targeting actin-regulatory proteins FHOD1 and PPM1F.

Jurmeister S(1), Baumann M, Balwierz A, Keklikoglou I, Ward A, Uhlmann S, Zhang
JD, Wiemann S, Sahin Ö.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.

MicroRNA-200c (miR-200c) has been shown to suppress epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which is attributed mainly to targeting of ZEB1/ZEB2,
repressors of the cell-cell contact protein E-cadherin. Here we demonstrated that
modulation of miR-200c in breast cancer cells regulates cell migration, cell
elongation, and transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß)-induced stress fiber
formation by impacting the reorganization of cytoskeleton that is independent of 
the ZEB/E-cadherin axis. We identified FHOD1 and PPM1F, direct regulators of the 
actin cytoskeleton, as novel targets of miR-200c. Remarkably, expression levels
of FHOD1 and PPM1F were inversely correlated with the level of miR-200c in breast
cancer cell lines, breast cancer patient samples, and 58 cancer cell lines of
various origins. Furthermore, individual knockdown/overexpression of these target
genes phenocopied the effects of miR-200c overexpression/inhibition on cell
elongation, stress fiber formation, migration, and invasion. Mechanistically,
targeting of FHOD1 by miR-200c resulted in decreased expression and
transcriptional activity of serum response factor (SRF), mediated by interference
with the translocation of the SRF coactivator mycocardin-related transcription
factor A (MRTF-A). This finally led to downregulation of the expression and
phosphorylation of the SRF target myosin light chain 2 (MLC2) gene, required for 
stress fiber formation and contractility. Thus, miR-200c impacts on metastasis by
regulating several EMT-related processes, including a novel mechanism involving
the direct targeting of actin-regulatory proteins.

PMCID: PMC3266604
PMID: 22144583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 15;10(24):4256-71. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.24.18552. Epub 2011
Dec 15.

miR-34 and SNAIL form a double-negative feedback loop to regulate
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions.

Siemens H(1), Jackstadt R, Hünten S, Kaller M, Menssen A, Götz U, Hermeking H.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 15;11(2):215-6.

Recently, the inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) by p53 has
been described as a new mode of tumor suppression which presumably prevents
metastasis. Here we report that activation of p53 down-regulates the EMT-inducing
transcription factor SNAIL via induction of the miR-34a/b/c genes. Suppression of
miR-34a/b/c caused up-regulation of SNAIL and cells displayed EMT markers and
related features, as enhanced migration and invasion.  Ectopic miR-34a induced
mesenchymal-epithelial-transition (MET) and down-regulation of SNAIL, which was
mediated by a conserved miR-34a/b/c seed-matching sequence in the SNAIL 3'-UTR.
miR-34a also down-regulated SLUG and ZEB1, as well as the stemness factors BMI1, 
CD44, CD133, OLFM4 and c-MYC. Conversely, the transcription factors SNAIL and
ZEB1 bound to E-boxes in the miR-34a/b/c promoters, thereby repressing miR-34a
and miR-34b/c expression. Since ectopic miR-34a prevented TGF-ß-induced EMT, the 
repression of miR-34 genes by SNAIL and related factors is part of the EMT
program. In conclusion, the frequent inactivation of p53 and/or miR-34a/b/c found
in cancer may shift the equilibrium of these reciprocal regulations towards the
mesenchymal state and thereby lock cells in a metastatic state.

PMID: 22134354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 15;72(2):527-36. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3004. Epub
2011 Nov 22.

Androgen deprivation causes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in the prostate:
implications for androgen-deprivation therapy.

Sun Y(1), Wang BE, Leong KG, Yue P, Li L, Jhunjhunwala S, Chen D, Seo K, Modrusan
Z, Gao WQ, Settleman J, Johnson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco,
California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2012 Jan;9(1):4.

Androgen deprivation is currently a standard-of-care, first-line therapy for
prostate cancer in the United States. Although this regimen effectively regresses
androgen-dependent disease, relapse often occurs in an androgen-independent
manner and is associated with poor prognosis. Such castration-resistant prostate 
cancer represents a major clinical challenge, and the mechanisms underlying
castration resistance are not fully understood. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) is a key developmental process and has also been implicated in cancer
metastasis and therapeutic resistance in recent years. However, the factors
contributing to EMT in human cancers remain unclear. Here, we show that both
normal mouse prostate tissue and human LuCaP35 prostate tumor explants display an
EMT as well as increased stem cell-like features following androgen deprivation. 
Importantly, we observed similar changes in mesenchymal features in prostate
tumors from patients treated with androgen-deprivation therapy. In addition, we
have delineated a feedback loop involving the androgen receptor and the Zeb1
transcription factor that seems to mediate this transition. In summary, we show
for the first time that androgen deprivation induces EMT in both normal prostate 
and prostate cancer, revealing a potentially important consequence of a
standard-of-care treatment for prostate cancer. This finding could have
significant implications for second-line treatment strategies in this clinical
setting.

PMID: 22108827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Stem Cells. 2012 Feb;30(2):292-303. doi: 10.1002/stem.791.

Epithelial and mesenchymal subpopulations within normal basal breast cell lines
exhibit distinct stem cell/progenitor properties.

Sarrio D(1), Franklin CK, Mackay A, Reis-Filho JS, Isacke CM.

Author information: 
(1)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, United Kingdom. david.sarrio@icr.ac.uk

It has been proposed that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in mammary
epithelial cells and breast cancer cells generates stem cell features, and that
the presence of EMT characteristics in claudin-low breast tumors reveals their
origin in basal stem cells. It remains to be determined, however, whether EMT is 
an inherent property of normal basal stem cells, and if the presence of a
mesenchymal-like phenotype is required for the maintenance of all their stem cell
properties. We used nontumorigenic basal cell lines as models of normal stem
cells/progenitors and demonstrate that these cell lines contain an epithelial
subpopulation ("EpCAM+," epithelial cell adhesion molecule positive
[EpCAM(pos)]/CD49f(high)) that spontaneously generates mesenchymal-like cells
("Fibros," EpCAM(neg)/CD49f(med/low)) through EMT. Importantly, stem
cell/progenitor properties such as regenerative potential, high aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 activity, and formation of three-dimensional acini-like
structures predominantly reside within EpCAM+ cells, while Fibros exhibit
invasive behavior and mammosphere-forming ability. A gene expression profiling
meta-analysis established that EpCAM+ cells show a luminal progenitor-like
expression pattern, while Fibros most closely resemble stromal fibroblasts but
not stem cells. Moreover, Fibros exhibit partial myoepithelial traits and strong 
similarities with claudin-low breast cancer cells. Finally, we demonstrate that
Slug and Zeb1 EMT-inducers control the progenitor and mesenchymal-like phenotype 
in EpCAM+ cells and Fibros, respectively, by inhibiting luminal differentiation. 
In conclusion, nontumorigenic basal cell lines have intrinsic capacity for EMT,
but a mesenchymal-like phenotype does not correlate with the acquisition of
global stem cell/progenitor features. Based on our findings, we propose that EMT 
in normal basal cells and claudin-low breast cancers reflects aberrant/incomplete
myoepithelial differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22102611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Dec 9;416(1-2):135-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.011. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Regulation of miR-200c by nuclear receptors PPARa, LRH-1 and SHP.

Zhang Y(1), Yang Z, Whitby R, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School
of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

We investigated regulation of miR-200c expression by nuclear receptors. Ectopic
expression of miR-200c inhibited MHCC97H cell migration, which was abrogated by
the synergistic effects of PPARa and LRH-1 siRNAs. The expression of miR-200c was
decreased by PPARa/LRH-1 siRNAs and increased by SHP siRNAs, and overexpression
of the receptors reversed the effects of their respective siRNAs. SHP siRNAs also
drastically enhanced the ability of the LRH-1 agonist RJW100 to induce miR-200c
and downregulate ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Co-expression of PPARa and LRH-1
moderately transactivated the miR-200c promoter, which was repressed by SHP
co-expression. RJW100 caused strong activation of the miR-200c promoter. This is 
the first report to demonstrate that miR-200c expression is controlled by nuclear
receptors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3248804
PMID: 22100809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Surg Oncol. 2012 Sep 1;106(3):280-5. doi: 10.1002/jso.22142. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Clinical significance of Zinc finger E-box Binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) in human
gastric cancer.

Okugawa Y(1), Toiyama Y, Tanaka K, Matsusita K, Fujikawa H, Saigusa S, Ohi M,
Inoue Y, Mohri Y, Uchida K, Kusunoki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal and Pediatric Surgery, Division of Reparative
Medicine, Institute of Life Sciences, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Zinc finger E-box Binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) encodes a 
transcription factor and is one of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-inducible genes that play a key role in tumor progression in various
cancers. The aim of this study is to clarify the clinical significance of ZEB1
expression in gastric cancer patients.
METHODS: One hundred thirty-four patients who underwent surgery for gastric
cancer were evaluated. We analyzed ZEB1 mRNA levels by real-time reverse
transcription PCR in gastric cancer tissue and adjacent normal mucosa. ZEB1
protein expression in primary cancer and in peritoneal dissemination samples was 
measured using immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: Expression of the ZEB1 gene was significantly higher in cancerous tissue
than in adjacent normal mucosa. Increased ZEB1 expression was significantly
associated with peritoneal dissemination, and was an independent prognostic
factor. Logistic regression analysis revealed that increased ZEB1 expression was 
an independent risk factor for peritoneal dissemination. Immunohistochemical
analysis indicated that ZEB1 was intensely expressed in both primary cancer and
peritoneal dissemination samples.
CONCLUSIONS: ZEB1 is an independent factor for peritoneal dissemination in
patients with gastric cancer, and may therefore play a key role in the
progression to peritoneal dissemination in gastric cancer patients.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22095522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Jul;19 Suppl 3:S634-45. doi: 10.1245/s10434-011-2142-0. Epub
2011 Nov 16.

Transient but not stable ZEB1 knockdown dramatically inhibits growth of malignant
pleural mesothelioma cells.

Horio M(1), Sato M, Takeyama Y, Elshazley M, Yamashita R, Hase T, Yoshida K,
Usami N, Yokoi K, Sekido Y, Kondo M, Toyokuni S, Gazdar AF, Minna JD, Hasegawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The role of ZEB1, a master epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition gene,
in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is unclear.
METHODS: The expression of ZEB1, E-cadherin, vimentin, and epithelial cell
adhesion molecule (EpCAM) in 18 MPM cell lines and a normal pleural mesothelial
cell line MeT-5A was determined by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction and Western blot testing. RNA interference-mediated transient and/or
stable knockdown of ZEB1 and EpCAM was performed. Microarray expression analysis 
was performed with a TORAY-3D gene chip. Growth was evaluated by colorimetric
proliferation and colony formation assays. Luciferase reporter assay was
performed to access the effects of ZEB1 knockdown on EpCAM promoter activity.
RESULTS: Most MPM cell lines exhibited mesenchymal phenotype and expressed ZEB1. 
Transient ZEB1 knockdown suppressed growth in all four cell lines studied
(ACC-MESO-1, H2052, Y-MESO-8A, Y-MESO-29) while stable ZEB1 knockdown suppressed 
growth only in Y-MESO-29. Genome-wide gene expression analysis revealed that
EpCAM was the most prominently up-regulated gene by both transient and stable
ZEB1 knockdown in ACC-MESO-1, with more marked up-regulation in stable knockdown.
We hypothesized that EpCAM up-regulation counteracts the stable ZEB1
knockdown-induced growth inhibition in ACC-MESO-1. Transient EpCAM knockdown
suppressed growth dramatically in ACC-MESO-1 cells expressing shZEB1 but only
modestly in those expressing shGFP, supporting our hypothesis. Luciferase
reporter assay showed that ZEB1 knockdown resulted in increased EpCAM promoter
activity. EpCAM was also up-regulated in Y-MESO-29 expressing shZEB1, but this
EpCAM up-regulation did not counteract ZEB1knockdown-induced growth suppression, 
suggesting that the counteracting effects of EpCAM may be cellular context
dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: RNA interference-mediated ZEB1 knockdown may be a promising
therapeutic strategy for MPM, but one has to consider the possibility of
diminished growth inhibitory effects of long-term ZEB1 knockdown, possibly as a
result of EpCAM up-regulation and/or other gene expression changes resulting from
ZEB1 knockdown.

PMCID: PMC3413790
PMID: 22086445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 29;108(48):19204-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1108977108. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

ß-catenin/TCF4 complex induces the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-activator ZEB1 to regulate tumor invasiveness.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), de Barrios O, Siles L, Cuatrecasas M, Castells A, Postigo A.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression, Department of Oncology
and Hematology, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

In most carcinomas, invasion of malignant cells into surrounding tissues involves
their molecular reprogramming as part of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT). Mutation of the APC gene in most colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) contributes 
to the nuclear translocation of the oncoprotein ß-catenin that upon binding to
T-cell and lymphoid enhancer (TCF-LEF) factors triggers an EMT and a proinvasive 
gene expression profile. A key inducer of EMT is the ZEB1 transcription factor
whose expression promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis in carcinomas. As
inhibitor of the epithelial phenotype, ZEB1 is never present in the epithelium of
normal colon or the tumor center of CRCs where ß-catenin remains membranous. We
show here that ZEB1 is expressed by epithelial cells in intestinal tumors from
human patients (familial adenomatous polyposis) and mouse models (APC(Min/+))
with germline mutations of APC that result in nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin. 
However, ZEB1 is not expressed in the epithelium of hereditary forms of CRCs that
carry wild-type APC and where ß-catenin is excluded from the nucleus (Lynch
syndrome). We found that ß-catenin/TCF4 binds directly to the ZEB1 promoter and
activates its transcription. Knockdown of ß-catenin and TCF4 in APC-mutated CRC
cells inhibited endogenous ZEB1, whereas forced translocation of ß-catenin to the
nucleus in APC-wild-type CRC cells induced de novo expression of ZEB1.
Upregulation of MT1-MMP and LAMC2 by ß-catenin/TCF4 has been linked to
invasiveness in CRCs, and we show here that both proteins are activated by ZEB1
coexpressing with it in primary colorectal tumors with mutated APC. These results
set ZEB1 as an effector of ß-catenin/TCF4 signaling in EMT and tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3228467
PMID: 22080605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mod Pathol. 2012 Feb;25(2):178-84. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.167. Epub 2011 Nov
11.

Metaplastic breast carcinomas are enriched in markers of tumor-initiating cells
and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Zhang Y(1), Toy KA, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.

Metaplastic breast carcinomas constitute a distinct aggressive form of invasive
breast cancer with histological evidence of epithelial to mesenchymal transition 
toward spindle, chondroid, or osseous cell types. During tumorigenesis,
epithelial to mesenchymal transition promotes invasion and metastasis and has
been linked to the presence of stem cells. We hypothesized that metaplastic
carcinomas may express epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers and may be
enriched in tumor-initiating cells specifically in the non-glandular metaplastic 
elements. In 27 primary metaplastic carcinomas of the breast we tested the
expression of epithelial to mesenchymal transition inducers ZEB1 and E-cadherin
and the presence of tumor-initiating cells by using aldehyde dehydrogenase-1
(ALDH-1) and CD44(+)/CD24(-/low) immunohistochemistry. Of the 27 metaplastic
carcinomas, 20 (74%) had squamous and/or spindle areas and 7 (26%) had
heterologous elements (6 chondroid and 1 osseous). ALDH-1-positive and
CD44(+)/CD24(-/low)-expressing cells were detected in the non-glandular
metaplastic components (Fisher's exact, P=0.0017). E-cadherin expression was
reduced or absent (aberrant) in all metaplastic components whereas it was normal 
in the glandular areas. On the contrary, overexpression of ZEB1 was detected in
41% (11 of 27) of the non-glandular, metaplastic components, and in none of the
glandular areas. The presence of tumor-initiating cells, aberrant E-cadherin, and
ZEB1 upregulation was associated in over 90% of the spindle areas and
heterologous elements (<U+03C7>(2) test, P<0.05). We provide first in situ evidence that
epithelial to mesenchymal transition inducers and tumor-initiating cells are
present specifically in the non-glandular components of metaplastic carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3360584
PMID: 22080057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 1;187(11):5636-44. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003988. Epub 2011
Nov 4.

Regulation of IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter activity (IFN-<U+03BB>1/IL-29) in human airway epithelial 
cells.

Siegel R(1), Eskdale J, Gallagher G.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Immunology Laboratory, HUMIGEN LLC, Institute for Genetic Immunology, 
Genesis Biotechnology Group, Hamilton, NJ 08690, USA.

The type III (<U+03BB>) IFNs (IFN-<U+03BB>1, IFN-<U+03BB>2, and IFN-<U+03BB>3) and their receptor are the
most recently discovered IFN family. They are induced by viruses and mediate
antiviral activity, but type III IFNs have an important, specific functional
niche at the immune/epithelial interface, as well as in the regulation of Th2
cytokines. Their expression appears diminished in bronchial epithelial cells of
rhinovirus-infected asthmatic individuals. We investigated the regulation of
IFN-<U+03BB>1 expression in human airway epithelial cells using reporter genes analysis,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, small interfering RNA knockdown, and DNase
footprinting. In this article, we define the c-REL/p65 NF-<U+03BA>B heterodimer and
IRF-1 as key transcriptional activators and ZEB1, B lymphocyte-induced maturation
protein 1, and the p50 NF-<U+03BA>B homodimer as key repressors of the IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene. We
further show that ZEB1 selectively regulates type III IFNs. To our knowledge,
this study presents the first characterization of any type III IFN promoter in
its native context and conformation in epithelial cells and can now be applied to
understanding pathogenic dysregulation of IFN-<U+03BB>1 in human disease.

PMID: 22058416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Br J Cancer. 2012 Jan 3;106(1):148-56. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.465. Epub 2011 Nov
1.

A microRNA gene expression signature predicts response to erlotinib in epithelial
cancer cell lines and targets EMT.

Bryant JL(1), Britson J, Balko JM, Willian M, Timmons R, Frolov A, Black EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, 343 Bio-Pharm
Complex, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0082, USA.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors can
result in clinical response in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) for some unselected patients. EGFR and KRAS mutation
status, amplification of EGFR, or gene expression predictors of response can
forecast sensitivity to EGFR inhibition.
METHODS: Using an NSCLC cell line model system, we identified and characterised
microRNA (miRNA) gene expression that predicts response to EGFR inhibition.
RESULTS: Expression of 13 miRNA genes predicts response to EGFR inhibition in
cancer cell lines and tumours, and discriminates primary from metastatic tumours.
Signature genes target proteins that are enriched for epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) genes. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition predicts EGFR
inhibitor resistance and metastatic behaviour. The EMT transcription factor,
ZEB1, shows altered expression in erlotinib-sensitive NSCLC and PDAC, where many 
signature miRNA genes are upregulated. Ectopic expression of mir-200c alters
expression of EMT proteins, sensitivity to erlotinib, and migration in lung
cells. Treatment with TGFß1 changes expression of signature miRNA and EMT
proteins and modulates migration in lung cells.
CONCLUSION: From these data, we hypothesise that the tumour microenvironment
elicits TGFß1 and stimulates a miRNA gene expression program that induces
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy and drives lung tumour cells to EMT, invasion,
and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3251842
PMID: 22045191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Oncogene. 2012 Jun 28;31(26):3190-201. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.493. Epub 2011 Oct
31.

TGF-ß drives epithelial-mesenchymal transition through dEF1-mediated
downregulation of ESRP.

Horiguchi K(1), Sakamoto K, Koinuma D, Semba K, Inoue A, Inoue S, Fujii H,
Yamaguchi A, Miyazawa K, Miyazono K, Saitoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial event in wound healing,
tissue repair and cancer progression in adult tissues. We have recently shown
that transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß-induced EMT involves isoform switching of
fibroblast growth factor receptors by alternative splicing. We performed a
microarray-based analysis at single exon level to elucidate changes in splicing
variants generated during TGF-ß-induced EMT, and found that TGF-ß induces broad
alteration of splicing patterns by downregulating epithelial splicing regulatory 
proteins (ESRPs). This was achieved by TGF-ß-mediated upregulation of dEF1 family
proteins, dEF1 and SIP1. dEF1 and SIP1 each remarkably repressed ESRP2
transcription through binding to the ESRP2 promoter in NMuMG cells. Silencing of 
both dEF1 and SIP1, but not either alone, abolished the TGF-ß-induced ESRP
repression. The expression profiles of ESRPs were inversely related to those of
dEF1 and SIP in human breast cancer cell lines and primary tumor specimens.
Further, overexpression of ESRPs in TGF-ß-treated cells resulted in restoration
of the epithelial splicing profiles as well as attenuation of certain phenotypes 
of EMT. Therefore, dEF1 family proteins repress the expression of ESRPs to
regulate alternative splicing during TGF-ß-induced EMT and the progression of
breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3391666
PMID: 22037216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Oncogene. 2012 Jun 21;31(25):3051-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.484. Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Smad3 regulates E-cadherin via miRNA-200 pathway.

Ahn SM(1), Cha JY, Kim J, Kim D, Trang HT, Kim YM, Cho YH, Park D, Hong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, Lee Gil
Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University of Medicine and Science,
Incheon, Korea.

To identify potential microRNA (miRNA) links between Smad3, a mediator of TGF-ß
(transforming growth factor-ß) signaling, and E-cadherin, we characterized the
miRNA profiles of two gastric cancer cell lines: SNU484-LPCX, which does not
express Smad3, and SNU484-Smad3, in which Smad3 is overexpressed. We found that
among differentially expressed miRNAs, miR-200 family members are overexpressed
in SNU484-Smad3 cells. Subsequent studies, including analysis of the effects of
silencing Smad3 in SNU484-Smad3 cells and a luciferase reporter assay, revealed
that Smad3 directly binds to a Smad-binding element located in the promoter
region of miR-200b/a, where it functions as a transcriptional activator. TGF-ß
did not affect the regulatory role of Smad3 in transcription of miR-200 and
expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers. We conclude that Smad3
regulates, at the transcriptional level, miR-200 family members, which themselves
regulate ZEB1 and ZEB2, known transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin, at the
posttranscriptional level in a TGF-ß-independent manner. This represents a novel 
link between Smad3 and posttranscriptional regulation by miRNAs in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in gastric cancer cells.

PMID: 22020340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cancer Genet. 2011 Sep;204(9):486-91. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.07.004.

miR-27 promotes human gastric cancer cell metastasis by inducing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Zhang Z(1), Liu S, Shi R, Zhao G.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery, Central Hospital of Shanghai Minhang District, China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in tumorigenesis. However, the
mechanisms by which miRNAs regulate gastric cancer metastasis remain poorly
understood. In the current study, we defined the target genes and biological
functions of miR-27 with a luciferase reporter assay and Western blot analysis.
We verified that miR-27 levels were increased in gastric cancer tissues. The
overexpression of miR-27 promoted the metastasis of AGS cells, whereas its
depletion decreased cell metastasis. Up-regulation of miR-27 increased the levels
of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-associated genes ZEB1, ZEB2, Slug,
and Vimentin, as well as decreased E-cadherin levels. We demonstrated that miR-27
promoted EMT by activating the Wnt pathway. Finally, the APC gene was identified 
as the direct and functional target of miR-27. These results suggest an important
role of miR-27 in regulating metastasis of gastric cancer and implicate the
potential application of miR-27 in gastric cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22018270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1(7):897-912. Epub 2011 Aug 20.

Expanding roles of ZEB factors in tumorigenesis and tumor progression.

Sánchez-Tilló E, Siles L, de Barrios O, Cuatrecasas M, Vaquero EC, Castells A,
Postigo A.

The ZEB family of transcription factors regulates key factors during embryonic
development and cell differentiation but their role in cancer biology has only
more recently begun to be recognized. Early evidence showed that ZEB proteins
induce an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition linking their expression with
increased aggressiveness and metastasis in mice models and a wide range of
primary human carcinomas. Reports over the last few years have found that ZEB
proteins also play critical roles in the maintenance of cancer cell stemness,
control of replicative senescence, tumor angiogenesis, overcoming of oncogenic
addiction and resistance to chemotherapy. These expanding roles in tumorigenesis 
and tumor progression set ZEB proteins as potential diagnostic, prognostic and
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3196287
PMID: 22016835  [PubMed]


261. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Feb 1;302(3):F369-79. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00268.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

The miR-200 family regulates TGF-ß1-induced renal tubular epithelial to
mesenchymal transition through Smad pathway by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2
expression.

Xiong M(1), Jiang L, Zhou Y, Qiu W, Fang L, Tan R, Wen P, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Diabetes Center; Center of Kidney Disease, 2nd Affiliated Hospital,
Nanjing Medical Univ., Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

Most chronic kidney injuries inevitably progress to irreversible renal fibrosis. 
Tubular epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is recognized to play pivotal 
roles in the process of renal fibrosis. However, a comprehensive understanding of
the pathogenesis of renal scar formation and progression remains an urgent task
for renal researchers. The endogenously produced microRNAs (miRNAs), proved to
play important roles in gene regulation, probably regulate most genes involved in
EMT. In this study, we applied microarray analysis to investigate the expression 
profiles of miRNA in murine interstitial fibrotic kidneys induced by unilateral
ureteral obstruction (UUO). It was found that miR-200a and miR-141, two members
of the miR-200 family, were downregulated at the early phase of UUO. In
TGF-ß1-induced tubular EMT in vitro, it was also found that the members of the
miR-200 family were downregulated in a Smad signaling-dependent manner. It was
demonstrated that the miR-200 family was responsible for protecting tubular
epithelial cells from mesenchymal transition by target suppression of zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox (ZEB) 1 and ZEB2, which are E-cadherin transcriptional
repressors. The results suggest that downregulation of the miR-200 family
initiates the dedifferentiation of renal tubules and progression of renal
fibrosis, which might provide important targets for novel therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 22012804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Oncogene. 2012 May 17;31(20):2512-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.435. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Gab2 regulates the migratory behaviors and E-cadherin expression via activation
of the PI3K pathway in ovarian cancer cells.

Wang Y(1), Sheng Q, Spillman MA, Behbakht K, Gu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

Ovarian cancer, the most deadly gynecologic malignancy, is often diagnosed late
and at the advanced stage when the cancer cells have already migrated and invaded
into other tissues and organs. Better understanding of the mechanism of
metastasis in ovarian cancer cells is essential to the design of effective
therapy. In this study, we investigated the function of scaffolding adaptor
protein Gab2 in ovarian cancer cells. Gab2 is found to be overexpressed in a
subset of ovarian tumors and cancer cell lines. Gab2 expression mainly regulates 
the migratory behaviors of ovarian cancer cells. Overexpression of Gab2 promotes 
the migration and invasion, and downregulates E-cadherin expression in ovarian
cancer cells with low-Gab2 expression. Conversely, knockdown of Gab2 expression
inhibits the migration and invasion, and promotes E-cadherin expression in
ovarian cancer cells with high-Gab2 expression. By expressing Gab2 wild-type and 
Gab2 mutants that are defective in activation of the PI3K and Shp2-Erk pathways, 
we find that Gab2 inhibits E-cadherin expression and enhances the expression of
Zeb1, a transcription factor involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), and cell migration and invasion through the activation of the PI3K
pathway. Knockdown of Zeb1 expression blocks Gab2-induced suppression of
E-cadherin expression and increase in cell invasion. LY294002 and GDC-0941,
inhibitors of PI3K, or Rapamycin, an inhibitor of PI3K downstream target mTOR,
can reverse the effects of Gab2 on migration and invasion. Overall, our studies
reveal that Gab2 overexpression, via activation of the PI3K-Zeb1 pathway,
promotes characteristics of EMT in ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3262088
PMID: 21996746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mod Pathol. 2012 Jan;25(1):86-99. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.144. Epub 2011 Oct 
7.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in malignant mesothelioma.

Fassina A(1), Cappellesso R, Guzzardo V, Dalla Via L, Piccolo S, Ventura L,
Fassan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Medical Sciences and Special Therapies, Surgical
Pathology and Cytopathology Unit, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
ambrogio.fassina@unipd.it

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition is a physiopathological process by which
epithelial cells acquire mesenchymal shape and properties. Malignant mesothelioma
is histologically characterized by the concomitant presence of epithelioid and
sarcomatoid features, the latter being associated to worse prognosis, thus
suggesting a role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in this dual phenotype. We
studied 109 malignant mesotheliomas (58 epithelioid, 26 sarcomatoid, and 25
biphasic) by immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR analysis, and demonstrated a
substantial switch from epithelial markers (E-cadherin, ß-catenin, and
cytokeratins 5/6) to mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin, vimentin, a-smooth muscle
actin, Snail, Slug, Twist, ZEB1, ZEB2, S100A4, MMP2, and MMP9) through
epithelioid to biphasic and sarcomatoid histotypes. In agreement with these
findings, the ectopic expression of miR-205 (a repressor of ZEB1 and ZEB2
expression) in MeT-5A (mesothelial cell line), H2452 (an epithelioid malignant
mesothelioma cell line) and MSTO-211H (a biphasic malignant mesothelioma cell
line) not only induced a significant reduction of ZEB1 and ZEB2 and a consequent 
up-regulation of E-cadherin gene expression, but also inhibited migration and
invasion. Moreover, miR-205 was significantly down-regulated in biphasic and
sarcomatoid histotypes (qRT-PCR and in situ hybridization analyses).
Collectively, our findings indicate that epithelial-mesenchymal transition has a 
significant part in the morphological features of malignant mesothelioma. In
particular, miR-205 down-regulation correlated significantly with both a
mesenchymal phenotype and a more aggressive behavior.

PMID: 21983934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002309. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

Cell type-specific transcriptome analysis reveals a major role for Zeb1 and
miR-200b in mouse inner ear morphogenesis.

Hertzano R(1), Elkon R, Kurima K, Morrisson A, Chan SL, Sallin M, Biedlingmaier
A, Darling DS, Griffith AJ, Eisenman DJ, Strome SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
rhertzano@smail.umaryland.edu

Cellular heterogeneity hinders the extraction of functionally significant results
and inference of regulatory networks from wide-scale expression profiles of
complex mammalian organs. The mammalian inner ear consists of the auditory and
vestibular systems that are each composed of hair cells, supporting cells,
neurons, mesenchymal cells, other epithelial cells, and blood vessels. We
developed a novel protocol to sort auditory and vestibular tissues of newborn
mouse inner ears into their major cellular components. Transcriptome profiling of
the sorted cells identified cell type-specific expression clusters. Computational
analysis detected transcription factors and microRNAs that play key roles in
determining cell identity in the inner ear. Specifically, our analysis revealed
the role of the Zeb1/miR-200b pathway in establishing epithelial and mesenchymal 
identity in the inner ear. Furthermore, we detected a misregulation of the ZEB1
pathway in the inner ear of Twirler mice, which manifest, among other phenotypes,
malformations of the auditory and vestibular labyrinth. The association of
misregulation of the ZEB1/miR-200b pathway with auditory and vestibular defects
in the Twirler mutant mice uncovers a novel mechanism underlying deafness and
balance disorders. Our approach can be employed to decipher additional complex
regulatory networks underlying other hearing and balance mouse mutants.

PMCID: PMC3183091
PMID: 21980309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002307. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002307. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

A noncoding point mutation of Zeb1 causes multiple developmental malformations
and obesity in Twirler mice.

Kurima K(1), Hertzano R, Gavrilova O, Monahan K, Shpargel KB, Nadaraja G,
Kawashima Y, Lee KY, Ito T, Higashi Y, Eisenman DJ, Strome SE, Griffith AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Otolaryngology Branch, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication 
Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of
America.

Heterozygous Twirler (Tw) mice develop obesity and circling behavior associated
with malformations of the inner ear, whereas homozygous Tw mice have cleft palate
and die shortly after birth. Zeb1 is a zinc finger protein that contributes to
mesenchymal cell fate by repression of genes whose expression defines epithelial 
cell identity. This developmental pathway is disrupted in inner ears of Tw/Tw
mice. The purpose of our study was to comprehensively characterize the Twirler
phenotype and to identify the causative mutation. The Tw/+ inner ear phenotype
includes irregularities of the semicircular canals, abnormal utricular otoconia, 
a shortened cochlear duct, and hearing loss, whereas Tw/Tw ears are severely
malformed with barely recognizable anatomy. Tw/+ mice have obesity associated
with insulin-resistance and have lymphoid organ hypoplasia. We identified a
noncoding nucleotide substitution, c.58+181G>A, in the first intron of the Tw
allele of Zeb1 (Zeb1(Tw)). A knockin mouse model of c.58+181G>A recapitulated the
Tw phenotype, whereas a wild-type knockin control did not, confirming the
mutation as pathogenic. c.58+181G>A does not affect splicing but disrupts a
predicted site for Myb protein binding, which we confirmed in vitro. In
comparison, homozygosity for a targeted deletion of exon 1 of mouse Zeb1,
Zeb1(<U+0394>Ex1), is associated with a subtle abnormality of the lateral semicircular
canal that is different than those in Tw mice. Expression analyses of E13.5
Twirler and Zeb1(<U+0394>Ex1) ears confirm that Zeb1(<U+0394>Ex1) is a null allele, whereas
Zeb1(Tw) RNA is expressed at increased levels in comparison to wild-type Zeb1. We
conclude that a noncoding point mutation of Zeb1 acts via a gain-of-function to
disrupt regulation of Zeb1(Tw) expression, epithelial-mesenchymal cell fate or
interactions, and structural development of the inner ear in Twirler mice. This
is a novel mechanism underlying disorders of hearing or balance.

PMCID: PMC3183090
PMID: 21980308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cancer Lett. 2011 Dec 26;313(1):26-43. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.08.018. Epub
2011 Sep 10.

Differential expression of microRNA expression in tamoxifen-sensitive MCF-7
versus tamoxifen-resistant LY2 human breast cancer cells.

Manavalan TT(1), Teng Y, Appana SN, Datta S, Kalbfleisch TS, Li Y, Klinge CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

Microarrays identified miRNAs differentially expressed and 4-hydroxytamoxifen
(4-OHT) regulated in MCF-7 endocrine-sensitive versus resistant LY2 human breast 
cancer cells. 97 miRNAs were differentially expressed in MCF-7 versus LY2 cells. 
Opposite expression of miRs-10a, 21, 22, 29a, 93, 125b, 181, 200a, 200b, 200c,
205, and 222 was confirmed. Bioinformatic analyses to impute the biological
significance of these miRNAs identified 36 predicted gene targets from those
regulated by 4-OHT in MCF-7 cells. Agreement in the direction of anticipated
regulation was detected for 12 putative targets. These miRNAs with opposite
expression between the two cell lines may be involved in endocrine resistance.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3214732
PMID: 21955614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Environ Health Perspect. 2012 Jan;120(1):92-7. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1104061. Epub
2011 Sep 27.

Akt activation is responsible for enhanced migratory and invasive behavior of
arsenic-transformed human bronchial epithelial cells.

Wang Z(1), Yang J, Fisher T, Xiao H, Jiang Y, Yang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Arsenic is one of the most common environmental contaminants.
Long-term exposure to arsenic causes human bronchial epithelial cell (HBEC)
malignant transformation and lung cancer. However, the mechanism of arsenic lung 
carcinogenesis is not clear, and the migratory and invasive properties of
arsenic-transformed cells (As-transformed cells) have rarely been studied.
OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to investigate the migratory and invasive
behavior of As-transformed HBECs and the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: As-transformed p53lowHBECs were generated by exposing p53-knockdown
HBECs to sodium arsenite (2.5 µM) for 16 weeks. Cell migration was assessed by
transwell migration and wound-healing assay. Cell invasion was evaluated using
Matrigel-coated transwell chambers. Gene overexpression, small interfering RNA
(siRNA) knockdowns, and pharmacological inhibitors were used to determine the
potential mechanism responsible for enhanced cell migration and invasion.
RESULTS: Transwell migration and invasion assays revealed that As-transformed
p53lowHBECs were highly migratory and invasive. Akt (also known as protein kinase
B) and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (Erk1/2) were strongly
activated in As-transformed p53lowHBECs. Stable expression of microRNA 200b in
As-transformed p53lowHBECs abolished Akt and Erk1/2 activation and completely
suppressed cell migration and invasion. Pharmacological inactivation of Akt but
not Erk1/2 significantly decreased cell migration and invasion. Inhibition of Akt
reduced the expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-inducing
transcription factors zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox factor 1 (ZEB1) and
ZEB2. siRNA knockdown of ZEB1 and ZEB2 impaired As-transformed p53lowHBEC
migration and invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: Akt activation plays a critical role in enabling As-transformed HBEC
migration and invasion by promoting ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3261952
PMID: 21954225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Hum Pathol. 2012 May;43(5):632-43. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.06.021. Epub 2011 
Sep 21.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition in early stage endometrioid endometrial
carcinoma.

Montserrat N(1), Mozos A, Llobet D, Dolcet X, Pons C, de Herreros AG, Matias-Guiu
X, Prat J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Autonomous
University of Barcelona, 08041 Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2013 Sep;44(9):1957.
    Hum Pathol. 2013 Sep;44(9):1956-7.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is thought to be implicated in tumor
invasion and metastasis. To investigate its role in myometrial invasion, samples 
from 42 stage I (confined to the corpus) endometrioid endometrial carcinomas were
analyzed. All E-cadherin repressors (SNAI1, SNAI2 (SLUG), ZEB1, HMGA2, and
TWIST1) had a higher expression in endometrioid endometrial carcinomas than in
normal endometrium (P < .0001), whereas CDH1 (E-cadherin gene) tended to be
lower. In comparison with nonmyoinvasive (stage IA) tumors, those with deep
myometrial invasion (stage IC) had increased messenger RNA expression of SLUG,
ZEB1, and HMGA2 (P < .001). Furthermore, samples from the myoinvasive front of
deeply invasive tumors had higher levels of SLUG, ZEB1, and HMGA2 than the
corresponding superficial samples. Immunohistochemical analysis of these cases
revealed that the decrease in E-cadherin was concordant with an increase in Snail
and Twist protein expression. Trying to induce epithelial to mesenchymal
transition in endometrioid endometrial carcinomas, we initially produced
persistent activation of this pathway in Ishikawa cells. The cell line was
infected with lentiviruses carrying the V600E mutation of BRAF, inducing loss of 
ß-catenin, E-cadherin, and cytokeratin and increase in vimentin and Snail. These 
changes were mediated by ERK1/2 phosphorylation, which was also increased at the 
myoinvasive front. Furthermore, MEK1/2 inhibitor UO126 reversed the mesenchymal
phenotype. Our findings suggest that epithelial to mesenchymal transition
regulators are implicated in myometrial invasion of endometrioid endometrial
carcinoma and may be potential therapeutic targets through the MAPK/ERK pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21940036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Nanobiotechnology. 2011 Sep 19;9:40. doi: 10.1186/1477-3155-9-40.

Nanoparticle-based delivery of siDCAMKL-1 increases microRNA-144 and inhibits
colorectal cancer tumor growth via a Notch-1 dependent mechanism.

Sureban SM(1), May R, Mondalek FG, Qu D, Ponnurangam S, Pantazis P, Anant S,
Ramanujam RP, Houchen CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

BACKGROUND: The development of effective drug delivery systems capable of
transporting small interfering RNA (siRNA) has been elusive. We have previously
reported that colorectal cancer tumor xenograft growth was arrested following
treatment with liposomal preparation of siDCAMKL-1. In this report, we have
utilized Nanoparticle (NP) technology to deliver DCAMKL-1 specific siRNA to
knockdown potential key cancer regulators. In this study, mRNA/miRNA were
analyzed using real-time RT-PCR and protein by western blot/immunohistochemistry.
siDCAMKL-1 was encapsulated in Poly(lactide-co-glycolide)-based NPs
(NP-siDCAMKL-1); Tumor xenografts were generated in nude mice, treated with
NP-siDCAMKL-1 and DAPT (<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor) alone and in combination. To
measure let-7a and miR-144 expression in vitro, HCT116 cells were transfected
with plasmids encoding the firefly luciferase gene with let-7a and miR-144 miRNA 
binding sites in the 3'UTR.
RESULTS: Administration of NP-siDCAMKL-1 into HCT116 xenografts resulted in tumor
growth arrest, downregulation of proto-oncogene c-Myc and Notch-1 via let-7a and 
miR-144 miRNA-dependent mechanisms, respectively. A corresponding reduction in
let-7a and miR-144 specific luciferase activity was observed in vitro. Moreover, 
an upregulation of EMT inhibitor miR-200a and downregulation of the
EMT-associated transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail and Slug were observed in 
vivo. Lastly, DAPT-mediated inhibition of Notch-1 resulted in HCT116 tumor growth
arrest and down regulation of Notch-1 via a miR-144 dependent mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that nanoparticle-based delivery of
siRNAs directed at critical targets such as DCAMKL-1 may provide a novel approach
to treat cancer through the regulation of endogenous miRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3200989
PMID: 21929751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Pancreas. 2012 Jan;41(1):107-13. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e318224b5fb.

Hydroxyurea decreases gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic carcinoma cells with
highly expressed ribonucleotide reductase.

Funamizu N(1), Kamata Y, Misawa T, Uwagawa T, Lacy CR, Yanaga K, Manome Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of DNA Medicine, The Jikei
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. funamizujikei@yahoo.co.jp

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to determine whether the treatment of pancreatic
carcinoma can be defined on the basis of the expression of genes involved in
gemcitabine metabolism and whether combination treatment is more effective than
conventional treatment.
METHODS: Four pancreatic carcinoma cell lines (Panc-1, MIAPaCa-2, BxPC-3, and
Capan-2) were used to determine the patterns of gemcitabine-metabolizing genes
and mesenchymal marker gene expressions using quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction. Chemosensitivity and cell proliferation were measured using
colorimetric assay. Gemcitabine was combined with hydroxyurea or small
interfering RNA targeting ribonucleotide reductase to assess changes in
chemoresistance.
RESULTS: Panc-1 and MIAPaCa-2 cell lines were profoundly chemoresistant and
expressed genes corresponding to cells with distinct mesenchymal phenotypes. In
addition, Panc-1 highly expressed ribonucleotide reductase and showed a 4-fold
increase in gemcitabine sensitivity after treatment with hydroxyurea.
CONCLUSIONS: Combination treatment tailored to cells with highly expressed
ribonucleotide reductase was more effective than treatment with gemcitabine
alone. Moreover, phenotype and gemcitabine metabolism may independently confer
chemoresistance.

PMID: 21926937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cancer Sci. 2011 Dec;102(12):2164-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02096.x. Epub
2011 Oct 12.

Regulation of microRNA expression by hepatocyte growth factor in human head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Susuki D(1), Kimura S, Naganuma S, Tsuchiyama K, Tanaka T, Kitamura N, Fujieda S,
Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Pathology, Department of Pathological Sciences, University
of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a multifunctional molecule that acts as
mitogen, motogen, and/or morphogen in a variety of cells. MET, a specific
receptor tyrosine kinase for HGF, is upregulated in various tumors including
squamous cell carcinoma of the human head and neck (HNSCC), but how HGF affects
the expression of downstream functional genes has not yet been elucidated in
detail. In the present study, we examined the expression of microRNA (miRNA),
non-coding small RNA that regulate cell proliferation and functions by
interfering with the translation of target mRNA, with or without HGF stimulation 
in HNSCC cell line HSC3. Among several miRNAs, in which the expression was
altered after HGF stimulation, we focused on miR-200c and miR-27b, both of which 
were drastically downregulated after HGF stimulation. Expression of ZEB1, a
target mRNA for miR-200c, was upregulated 3 and 6 h after HGF stimulation, and
that of E-cadherin, a downstream molecule of ZEB1, was downregulated 12 h after
HGF stimulation. Expression of ST14/matriptase, an enzyme for extracellular
matrix (ECM) degradation and HGF activation and a target mRNA for miR-27b, was
drastically upregulated in the protein level after HGF stimulation, although it
was not statistically altered in the mRNA level. These results suggest that
miR-200c and miR-27b downregulated by HGF might play an important role in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition mediated by ZEB1/E-cadherin and ECM degradation
and HGF autoactivation mediated by ST14/matriptase, respectively. Altered
expression of miRNA directly regulated by HGF might contribute enhanced
progressive and invasive characteristics of HNSCC by regulating the translation
of HGF-induced functional molecules.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21899661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Pharm. 2011 Dec 5;8(6):2055-62. doi: 10.1021/mp200255d. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

MicroRNA expression profiles associated with development of drug resistance in
Ehrlich ascites tumor cells.

Husted S(1), Søkilde R, Rask L, Cirera S, Busk PK, Eriksen J, Litman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
Denmark.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) poses a major obstacle to successful chemotherapeutic 
treatment of cancer, and often involves multiple genes, which may be regulated
post-transcriptionally by microRNAs (miRNAs). The purpose of the present study
was therefore to identify any resistance-associated changes in miRNA expression
in a sensitive and five increasingly drug-resistant Ehrlich ascites tumor (EAT)
cell lines, representing different steps in the development of resistance. We
used an LNA-enhanced microarray platform to study the global miRNA expression
profiles in the six murine EAT cell lines, and identified growth-, hypoxia-, and 
resistance-specific miRNA patterns. Among the differentially expressed miRNAs, we
found the two clusters miR-183~miR-96~miR-182 and miR-200b~miR-200a~miR-429 as
well as miR-141 to be consistently upregulated in the MDR cell lines, while
miR-125b-5p and the two clusters miR-30d~miR-30b and miR-23b~miR-27b~miR-24-1
were downregulated in most of the resistant EAT cells. Several of the target
genes for these miRNAs-including Zeb1/Zeb2 and members of the Fox gene
family-could contribute to the drug-resistant phenotype, although we did not find
that the degree of resistance was directly correlated to any specific changes in 
miRNA expression. Probably, the observed miRNA expression patterns reflect the
underlying genomic instability of the tumor cells, and further studies are needed
to explore how the highly complex regulatory miRNA networks contribute to the
development of MDR.

PMID: 21899346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 1;71(21):6836-47. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0846. Epub
2011 Sep 2.

A NOTCH3-mediated squamous cell differentiation program limits expansion of
EMT-competent cells that express the ZEB transcription factors.

Ohashi S(1), Natsuizaka M, Naganuma S, Kagawa S, Kimura S, Itoh H, Kalman RA,
Nakagawa M, Darling DS, Basu D, Gimotty PA, Klein-Szanto AJ, Diehl JA, Herlyn M, 
Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Zinc finger E-box-binding (ZEB) proteins ZEB1 and ZEB2 are transcription factors 
essential in TGF-ß-mediated senescence, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), and cancer stem cell functions. ZEBs are negatively regulated by members
of the miR-200 microRNA family, but precisely how tumor cells expressing ZEBs
emerge during invasive growth remains unknown. Here, we report that
NOTCH3-mediated signaling prevents expansion of a unique subset of ZEB-expressing
cells. ZEB expression was associated with the lack of cellular capability of
undergoing NOTCH3-mediated squamous differentiation in human esophageal cells.
Genetic inhibition of the Notch-mediated transcriptional activity by
dominant-negative Mastermind-like 1 (DNMAML1) prevented squamous differentiation 
and induction of Notch target genes including NOTCH3. Moreover, DNMAML1-enriched 
EMT-competent cells exhibited robust upregulation of ZEBs, downregulation of the 
miR-200 family, and enhanced anchorage-independent growth and tumor formation in 
nude mice. RNA interference experiments suggested the involvement of ZEBs in
anchorage-independent colony formation, invasion, and TGF-ß-mediated EMT.
Invasive growth and impaired squamous differentiation were recapitulated upon
Notch inhibition by DNMAML1 in organotypic three-dimensional culture, a form of
human tissue engineering. Together, our findings indicate that NOTCH3 is a key
factor limiting the expansion of ZEB-expressing cells, providing novel
mechanistic insights into the role of Notch signaling in the cell fate regulation
and disease progression of esophageal squamous cancers.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3206139
PMID: 21890822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Dec 1;20(23):4655-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr399. Epub 2011 Sep 
2.

KDM6B/JMJD3 histone demethylase is induced by vitamin D and modulates its effects
in colon cancer cells.

Pereira F(1), Barbáchano A, Silva J, Bonilla F, Campbell MJ, Muñoz A, Larriba MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto 
Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

KDM6B/JMJD3 is a histone H3 lysine demethylase with an important gene regulatory 
role in development and physiology. Here, we show that human JMJD3 expression is 
induced by the active vitamin D metabolite 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3)
(1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) and that JMJD3 modulates the gene regulatory action of this
hormone. 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) activates the JMJD3 gene promoter and increases the
level of JMJD3 RNA in human cancer cells. JMJD3 upregulation was strictly
dependent on vitamin D receptor (VDR) expression and was abolished by
cycloheximide. In SW480-ADH colon cancer cells, JMJD3 knockdown or expression of 
an inactive mutant JMJD3 fragment decreased the induction by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) of
several target genes and of an epithelial adhesive phenotype. Moreover, JMJD3
knockdown upregulated the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition inducers SNAIL1
and ZEB1 and the mesenchymal markers fibronectin and LEF1, while it downregulated
the epithelial proteins E-cadherin, Claudin-1 and Claudin-7. Additionally, JMJD3 
knockdown abolished the nuclear export of ß-catenin and the inhibition of
ß-catenin transcriptional activity caused by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Importantly, the
expression of JMJD3 correlated directly with that of VDR and inversely with that 
of SNAI1 in a series of 96 human colon tumours. Our results indicate for the
first time that an epigenetic gene coding for a histone demethylase such as JMJD3
is a VDR co-target that partially mediates the effects of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) on
human colon.

PMID: 21890490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Gastroenterology. 2011 Dec;141(6):2140-53. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.08.038.
Epub 2011 Aug 28.

Claudin-1 up-regulates the repressor ZEB-1 to inhibit E-cadherin expression in
colon cancer cells.

Singh AB(1), Sharma A, Smith JJ, Krishnan M, Chen X, Eschrich S, Washington MK,
Yeatman TJ, Beauchamp RD, Dhawan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Expression of the tight junction protein claudin-1 is
dysregulated in colon tumors and associates with their progression. Up-regulation
of claudin-1 reduces expression of E-cadherin. We investigated the mechanisms by 
which claudin-1 regulates E-cadherin expression and its effects in colon cancer
cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used gene expression analysis, immunoblotting, and
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction to associate expression of the
repressor of transcription Zinc Finger E-box binding homeobox-box1 (ZEB-1) with
claudin-1. We analyzed SW480 colon cancer cells that overexpressed claudin-1, or 
SW620 cells in which claudin-1 expression was repressed, to determine the effects
on ZEB-1 and E-cadherin expression, invasive activity, and resistance to anoikis.
We studied cells that expressed constitutively active or dominant negative forms 
of factors in the Wnt or phosphotidylinositol-3-kinase signaling pathways and
used pharmacologic inhibitors of these pathways to study their role in
claudin-1-dependent regulation of ZEB-1. We used microarray analysis to examine
gene expression patterns in 260 colorectal tumor and normal colon samples.
RESULTS: Claudin-1 down-regulates E-cadherin expression by up-regulating
expression of ZEB-1. Claudin-1 activates Wnt and
phosphotidylinositol-3-kinase/Akt signaling. ZEB-1 mediates claudin-1-regulated
changes in cell invasion and anoikis. Expression of claudin-1 correlated with
that of ZEB-1 in human colon tumor samples. In the progression from normal
colonic epithelium to colon adenocarcinoma, levels of E-cadherin decreased,
whereas levels of claudin-1 and ZEB-1 increased. Down-regulation of E-cadherin
and up-regulation of ZEB-1 in colon tumors were associated with shorter survival 
times.
CONCLUSIONS: Claudin-1 up-regulates the repressor ZEB-1 to reduce expression of
E-cadherin in colon cancer cells, increasing their invasive activity and reducing
anoikis. This pathway is associated with colorectal cancer progression and
patient survival.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3395068
PMID: 21878201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 19;31(16):2062-74. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.383. Epub 2011 Aug
29.

Dynamic epigenetic regulation of the microRNA-200 family mediates epithelial and 
mesenchymal transitions in human tumorigenesis.

Davalos V(1), Moutinho C, Villanueva A, Boque R, Silva P, Carneiro F, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.

Epithelial-mesenchymal (EMT) and mesenchymal-epithelial (MET) transitions occur
in the development of human tumorigenesis and are part of the natural history of 
the process to adapt to the changing microenvironment. In this setting, the
miR-200 family is recognized as a master regulator of the epithelial phenotype by
targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2, two important transcriptional repressors of the cell
adherence (E-cadherin) and polarity (CRB3 and LGL2) genes. Recently, the putative
DNA methylation associated inactivation of various miR-200 members has been
described in cancer. Herein, we show that the miR-200ba429 and miR-200c141
transcripts undergo a dynamic epigenetic regulation linked to EMT or MET
phenotypes in tumor progression. The 5'-CpG islands of both miR-200 loci were
found unmethylated and coupled to the expression of the corresponding miRNAs in
human cancer cell lines with epithelial features, such as low levels of ZEB1/ZEB2
and high expression of E-cadherin, CRB3 and LGL2, while CpG island
hypermethylation-associated silencing was observed in transformed cells with
mesenchymal characteristics. The recovery of miR-200ba429 and miR-200c141
expression by stable transfection in the hypermethylated cells restored the
epithelial markers and inhibited migration in cell culture and tumoral growth and
metastasis formation in nude mice. We also discovered, using both cell culture
and animal models, that the miR-200 epigenetic silencing is not an static and
fixed process but it can be shifted to hypermethylated or unmethylated 5'-CpG
island status corresponding to the EMT and MET phenotypes, respectively. In fact,
careful laser microdissection in human primary colorectal tumorigenesis unveiled 
that in normal colon mucosa crypts (epithelia) and stroma (mesenchyma) already
are unmethylated and methylated at these loci, respectively; and that the
colorectal tumors undergo selective miR-200 hypermethylation of their epithelial 
component. These findings indicate that the epigenetic silencing plasticity of
the miR-200 family contributes to the evolving and adapting phenotypes of human
tumors.

PMCID: PMC3330264
PMID: 21874049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 12;31(15):1963-74. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.373. Epub 2011 Aug
29.

Stabilization of phenotypic plasticity through mesenchymal-specific DNA
hypermethylation in cancer cells.

Kurasawa Y(1), Kozaki K, Pimkhaokham A, Muramatsu T, Ono H, Ishihara T, Uzawa N, 
Imoto I, Amagasa T, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute and School of
Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Yushima Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has a crucial role in normal and
disease processes including tumor progression. In this study, we first classified
epithelial-like and mesenchymal-like oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines based on expression profiles of typical EMT-related genes using a panel of 
18 OSCC cell lines. Then, we performed methylation-based and expression-based
analyses of components of the Wnt signaling pathway, and identified WNT7A and
WNT10A as genes silenced by mesenchymal-specific DNA hypermethylation in OSCCs. A
significant association was revealed between some clinicopathological findings
and the DNA methylation status of WNT7A (normal vs tumor, P=0.007; T1-2 vs T3-4, 
P=0.040; I-III vs IV, P=0.016) and WNT10A (N0-N1 vs N2-N3, P=0.046) in the
advanced stages of OSCC. Moreover, we found that E-cadherin expression in cancer 
cells may be positively regulated by WNT7A, whose expression is negatively
regulated by mesenchymal-specific DNA hypermethylation or ZEB1 in
mesenchymal-like OSCC cells. Our findings indicate that epithelial-specific gene 
silencing through mesenchymal-specific DNA hypermethylation may stabilize the
phenotypic plasticity of cancer cells during EMT/MET.

PMID: 21874048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cancer Cell Int. 2011 Aug 16;11:28. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-11-28.

Murine mammary tumor cells with a claudin-low genotype.

Campbell CI(1), Thompson DE, Siwicky MD, Moorehead RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G2W1, Canada. rmoorehe@uoguelph.ca.

BACKGROUND: Molecular classification of human breast cancers has identified at
least 5 distinct tumor subtypes; luminal A, luminal B, Her2-enriched, basal-like 
and claudin-low. The claudin-low subtype was identified in 2007 and is
characterized by low expression of luminal differentiation markers and claudins
3, 4 and 7 and high levels of mesenchymal markers. Claudin-low tumors have a
reported prevalence of 7-14% and these tumors have a poor prognosis.
RESULTS: In this study we report the characterization of several cell lines
established from mammary tumors that develop in MTB-IGFIR transgenic mice. Two
lines, RM11A and RJ348 present with histological features and gene expression
patterns that resemble claudin-low breast tumors. Specifically, RM11A and RJ348
cells express high levels of the mesenchymal genes Zeb1, Zeb2, Twist1 and Twist2 
and very low levels of E-cadherin and claudins 3, 4 and 7. The RM11A and RJ348
cells are also highly tumorigenic when re-introduced into the mammary fat pad of 
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Mammary tumor cells established from MTB-IGFIR transgenic mice can
be used as in vitro and in vivo model systems to further our understanding of the
poorly characterized, claudin-low, breast cancer subtype.

PMCID: PMC3170246
PMID: 21846397  [PubMed]


279. Oncogene. 2012 Mar 1;31(9):1130-42. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.312. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Identification of stromally expressed molecules in the prostate by tag-profiling 
of cancer-associated fibroblasts, normal fibroblasts and fetal prostate.

Orr B(1), Riddick AC, Stewart GD, Anderson RA, Franco OE, Hayward SW, Thomson AA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, The Queen's Medical
Research Institute, Edinburgh, UK.

The stromal microenvironment has key roles in prostate development and cancer,
and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) stimulate tumourigenesis via several
mechanisms including the expression of pro-tumourigenic factors. Mesenchyme
(embryonic stroma) controls prostate organogenesis, and in some circumstances can
re-differentiate prostate tumours. We have applied next-generation Tag profiling 
to fetal human prostate, normal human prostate fibroblasts (NPFs) and CAFs to
identify molecules expressed in prostatic stroma. Comparison of gene expression
profiles of a patient-matched pair of NPFs vs CAFs identified 671 transcripts
that were enriched in CAFs and 356 transcripts whose levels were decreased,
relative to NPFs. Gene ontology analysis revealed that CAF-enriched transcripts
were associated with prostate morphogenesis and CAF-depleted transcripts were
associated with cell cycle. We selected mRNAs to follow-up by comparison of our
data sets with published prostate cancer fibroblast microarray profiles as well
as by focusing on transcripts encoding secreted and peripheral membrane proteins,
as well as mesenchymal transcripts identified in a previous study from our group.
We confirmed differential transcript expression between CAFs and NPFs using
QrtPCR, and defined protein localization using immunohistochemistry in fetal
prostate, adult prostate and prostate cancer. We demonstrated that ASPN, CAV1,
CFH, CTSK, DCN, FBLN1, FHL1, FN, NKTR, OGN, PARVA, S100A6, SPARC, STC1 and ZEB1
proteins showed specific and varied expression patterns in fetal human prostate
and in prostate cancer. Colocalization studies suggested that some stromally
expressed molecules were also expressed in subsets of tumour epithelia,
indicating that they may be novel markers of EMT. Additionally, two molecules
(ASPN and STC1) marked overlapping and distinct subregions of stroma associated
with tumour epithelia and may represent new CAF markers.

PMCID: PMC3307063
PMID: 21804603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jul 1;131(1):30-40. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26323. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Inhibition of sonic hedgehog pathway and pluripotency maintaining factors
regulate human pancreatic cancer stem cell characteristics.

Tang SN(1), Fu J, Nall D, Rodova M, Shankar S, Srivastava RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine,
University of Kansas Cancer Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160, USA.

Activation of the sonic hedgehog (SHh) pathway is required for the growth of
numerous tissues and organs and recent evidence indicates that this pathway is
often recruited to stimulate growth of cancer stem cells (CSCs) and to
orchestrate the reprogramming of cancer cells via epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular
mechanisms by which (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), an active compound in 
green tea, inhibits self-renewal capacity of pancreatic CSCs and synergizes with 
quercetin, a major polyphenol and flavonoid commonly detected in many fruits and 
vegetables. Our data demonstrated that EGCG inhibited the expression of
pluripotency maintaining transcription factors (Nanog, c-Myc and Oct-4) and
self-renewal capacity of pancreatic CSCs. Inhibition of Nanog by shRNA enhanced
the inhibitory effects of EGCG on self-renewal capacity of CSCs. EGCG inhibited
cell proliferation and induced apoptosis by inhibiting the expression of Bcl-2
and XIAP and activating caspase-3. Interestingly, EGCG also inhibited the
components of SHh pathway (smoothened, patched, Gli1 and Gli2) and Gli
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, EGCG inhibited EMT by inhibiting the
expression of Snail, Slug and ZEB1, and TCF/LEF transcriptional activity, which
correlated with significantly reduced CSC's migration and invasion, suggesting
the blockade of signaling involved in early metastasis. Furthermore, combination 
of quercetin with EGCG had synergistic inhibitory effects on self-renewal
capacity of CSCs through attenuation of TCF/LEF and Gli activities. Since
aberrant SHh signaling occurs in pancreatic tumorigenesis, therapeutics that
target SHh pathway may improve the outcomes of patients with pancreatic cancer by
targeting CSCs.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3480310
PMID: 21796625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cancer Lett. 2011 Nov 1;310(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.04.009. Epub 2011 
Jun 24.

Resveratrol inhibits the epidermal growth factor-induced epithelial mesenchymal
transition in MCF-7 cells.

Vergara D(1), Valente CM, Tinelli A, Siciliano C, Lorusso V, Acierno R,
Giovinazzo G, Santino A, Storelli C, Maffia M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of General Physiology, Department of Biological and Environmental
Sciences and Technologies, University of Salento, via Monteroni 73100, Lecce,
Italy.

Carcinoma progression is associated with the loss of epithelial features, and the
acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype by tumour cells. Herein we show that
exposure of MCF-7 cells to epidermal growth factor (EGF) resulted in
morphological alterations characteristic of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT). EGF treatment resulted in increased motility along with an up-regulation
of transcription factors Slug, Zeb1, Zeb2, and mesenchymal markers Vimentin and
N-cadherin. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with a combined stimulation of EGF and
resveratrol, a naturally occurring stilbene with antitumor properties, failed to 
alter cell morphology, motility and overexpression of EMT markers induced by EGF.
Using specific chemical inhibitors, we demonstrated that EGF-induced EMT is
mediated by extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK 1/2) signalling
pathway and that resveratrol is able to repress EGF-induced ERK activation. In
summary, these data provide new evidence of the inhibitory effect of resveratrol 
on EGF-induced EMT cell transformation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21794976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Cancer. 2011 Jul 27;10:91. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-91.

ZEB1 limits adenoviral infectability by transcriptionally repressing the
coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor.

Lacher MD(1), Shiina M, Chang P, Keller D, Tiirikainen MI, Korn WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have previously reported that RAS-MEK (Cancer Res. 2003 May
1;63(9):2088-95) and TGF-ß (Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1648-57) signaling
negatively regulate coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) cell-surface
expression and adenovirus uptake. In the case of TGF-ß, down-regulation of CAR
occurred in context of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process
associated with transcriptional repression of E-cadherin by, for instance, the E2
box-binding factors Snail, Slug, SIP1 or ZEB1. While EMT is crucial in embryonic 
development, it has been proposed to contribute to the formation of invasive and 
metastatic carcinomas by reducing cell-cell contacts and increasing cell
migration.
RESULTS: Here, we show that ZEB1 represses CAR expression in both PANC-1
(pancreatic) and MDA-MB-231 (breast) human cancer cells. We demonstrate that ZEB1
physically associates with at least one of two closely spaced and conserved E2
boxes within the minimal CAR promoter here defined as genomic region -291 to -1
relative to the translational start ATG. In agreement with ZEB1's established
role as a negative regulator of the epithelial phenotype, silencing its
expression in MDA-MB-231 cells induced a partial Mesenchymal-to-Epithelial
Transition (MET) characterized by increased levels of E-cadherin and CAR, and
decreased expression of fibronectin. Conversely, knockdown of ZEB1 in PANC-1
cells antagonized both the TGF-ß-induced down-regulation of E-cadherin and CAR
and the reduction of adenovirus uptake. Interestingly, even though ZEB1 clearly
contributes to the TGF-ß-induced mesenchymal phenotype of PANC-1 cells, TGF-ß did
not seem to affect ZEB1's protein levels or subcellular localization. These
findings suggest that TGF-ß may inhibit CAR expression by regulating factor(s)
that cooperate with ZEB1 to repress the CAR promoter, rather than by regulating
ZEB1 expression levels. In addition to the negative E2 box-mediated regulation
the minimal CAR promoter is positively regulated through conserved ETS and CRE
elements.
CONCLUSIONS: This report provides evidence that inhibition of ZEB1 may improve
adenovirus uptake of cancer cells that have undergone EMT and for which ZEB1 is
necessary to maintain the mesenchymal phenotype. Targeting of ZEB1 may reverse
some aspects of EMT including the down-regulation of CAR.

PMCID: PMC3164624
PMID: 21791114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Aug 3;103(15):1162-78. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djr224. Epub
2011 Jul 19.

Effect of brain- and tumor-derived connective tissue growth factor on glioma
invasion.

Edwards LA(1), Woolard K, Son MJ, Li A, Lee J, Ene C, Mantey SA, Maric D, Song H,
Belova G, Jensen RT, Zhang W, Fine HA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute/National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-1002, USA.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Aug 3;103(15):1141-3.

BACKGROUND: Tumor cell invasion is the principal cause of treatment failure and
death among patients with malignant gliomas. Connective tissue growth factor
(CTGF) has been previously implicated in cancer metastasis and invasion in
various tumors. We explored the mechanism of CTGF-mediated glioma cell
infiltration and examined potential therapeutic targets.
METHODS: Highly infiltrative patient-derived glioma tumor-initiating or tumor
stem cells (TIC/TSCs) were harvested and used to explore a CTGF-induced signal
transduction pathway via luciferase reporter assays, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), real-time polymerase chain reaction, and
immunoblotting. Treatment of TIC/TSCs with small-molecule inhibitors targeting
integrin ß1 (ITGB1) and the tyrosine kinase receptor type A (TrkA), and short
hairpin RNAs targeting CTGF directly were used to reduce the levels of key
protein components of CTGF-induced cancer infiltration. TIC/TSC infiltration was 
examined in real-time cell migration and invasion assays in vitro and by
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization in TIC/TSC orthotopic xenograft
mouse models (n = 30; six mice per group). All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Treatment of TIC/TSCs with CTGF resulted in CTGF binding to ITGB1-TrkA
receptor complexes and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) transcriptional activation 
as measured by luciferase reporter assays (mean relative luciferase activity,
untreated vs CTGF(200 ng/mL): 0.53 vs 1.87, difference = 1.34, 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 0.69 to 2, P < .001). NF-<U+03BA>B activation resulted in binding of
ZEB-1 to the E-cadherin promoter as demonstrated by ChIP analysis with subsequent
E-cadherin suppression (fold increase in ZEB-1 binding to the E-cadherin promoter
region: untreated + ZEB-1 antibody vs CTGF(200 ng/mL) + ZEB-1 antibody: 1.5 vs
6.4, difference = 4.9, 95% CI = 4.8 to 5.0, P < .001). Immunohistochemistry and
in situ hybridization revealed that TrkA is selectively expressed in the most
infiltrative glioma cells in situ and that the surrounding reactive astrocytes
secrete CTGF.
CONCLUSION: A CTGF-rich microenvironment facilitates CTGF-ITGB1-TrkA complex
activation in TIC/TSCs, thereby increasing the invasiveness of malignant gliomas.

PMCID: PMC3149042
PMID: 21771732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Aug 3;103(15):1141-3. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djr261. Epub
2011 Jul 19.

Connective tissue growth factor and the parallels between brain injury and brain 
tumors.

Halliday JJ, Holland EC.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Aug 3;103(15):1162-78.

PMID: 21771731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021650. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

TMPRSS2/ERG promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition through the ZEB1/ZEB2
axis in a prostate cancer model.

Leshem O(1), Madar S, Kogan-Sakin I, Kamer I, Goldstein I, Brosh R, Cohen Y,
Jacob-Hirsch J, Ehrlich M, Ben-Sasson S, Goldfinger N, Loewenthal R, Gazit E,
Rotter V, Berger R.

Author information: 
(1)Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.

Prostate cancer is the most common non-dermatologic malignancy in men in the
Western world. Recently, a frequent chromosomal aberration fusing androgen
regulated TMPRSS2 promoter and the ERG gene (TMPRSS2/ERG) was discovered in
prostate cancer. Several studies demonstrated cooperation between TMPRSS2/ERG and
other defective pathways in cancer progression. However, the unveiling of more
specific pathways in which TMPRSS2/ERG takes part, requires further
investigation. Using immortalized prostate epithelial cells we were able to show 
that TMPRSS2/ERG over-expressing cells undergo an Epithelial to Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT), manifested by acquisition of mesenchymal morphology and markers
as well as migration and invasion capabilities. These findings were corroborated 
in vivo, where the control cells gave rise to discrete nodules while the
TMPRSS2/ERG-expressing cells formed malignant tumors, which expressed EMT
markers. To further investigate the general transcription scheme induced by
TMPRSS2/ERG, cells were subjected to a microarray analysis that revealed a
distinct EMT expression program, including up-regulation of the EMT facilitators,
ZEB1 and ZEB2, and down-regulation of the epithelial marker CDH1(E-Cadherin). A
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed direct binding of TMPRSS2/ERG to the
promoter of ZEB1 but not ZEB2. However, TMPRSS2/ERG was able to bind the
promoters of the ZEB2 modulators, IL1R2 and SPINT1. This set of experiments
further illuminates the mechanism by which the TMPRSS2/ERG fusion affects
prostate cancer progression and might assist in targeting TMPRSS2/ERG and its
downstream targets in future drug design efforts.

PMCID: PMC3128608
PMID: 21747944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cancer. 2012 Feb 15;118(4):924-36. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26184. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Zinc finger E-box binding factor 1 plays a central role in regulating
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent-lytic switch and acts as a therapeutic target in 
EBV-associated gastric cancer.

Zhao J(1), Jin H, Cheung KF, Tong JH, Zhang S, Go MY, Tian L, Kang W, Leung PP,
Zeng Z, Li X, To KF, Sung JJ, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Disease and Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Li
Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong.

BACKGROUND: The role of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection in gastric
carcinogenesis remains largely unknown. The authors studied the effects of zinc
finger E-box binding factor 1 (ZEB1) on latent-lytic switch of EBV infection in
gastric cancer and explored the importance of EBV in gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Loss or gain of ZEB1 function was obtained by ZEB1 small-interfering RNA
(siRNA) knock-down or forced ZEB1 re-expression. Cell growth was evaluated by
cell viability and colony formation assays, and the cell cycle was assessed by
flow cytometry. EBV was detected using quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and in situ hybridization analyses.
RESULTS: ZEB1 knock-down in a latent EBV-infected gastric cancer cell line
(YCC10) increased lytic gene BamHI W leftward reading frame 1 (BZLF1) expression 
and decreased the expression of latent gene EB nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1)
concomitant with the inhibition of cell viability (P < .05) and S-phase DNA
synthesis (P < .01). ZEB1 depletion combined with ganciclovir revealed a further 
reduction in cell viability (P < .001). ZEB1 knock-down induced cell apoptosis
and the up-regulation of caspase 3 and poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose)
polymerase cleavage. Conversely, ectopic overexpression of ZEB1 in a lytic
EBV-infected gastric cancer cell line (AGS-EBV) inhibited BZLF1 promoter (Zp)
activity, BZLF1 expression, and apoptosis and promoted cell growth. EBV infection
was detected in 11.3% (80 of 711) of gastric cancers. The presence of EBV was
associated with age, men, and intestinal type cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: ZEB1 was confirmed as a key mediator of the latent-lytic switch of
EBV-associated gastric cancer, a distinct subtype with different
clinicopathologic features. The current results indicated that inhibition of ZEB1
may be a potential target for EBV-associated gastric cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21717425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Am J Pathol. 2011 Jul;179(1):400-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.03.028. Epub 2011
May 4.

Metastatic progression of prostate cancer and e-cadherin regulation by zeb1 and
SRC family kinases.

Putzke AP(1), Ventura AP, Bailey AM, Akture C, Opoku-Ansah J, Celiktas M, Hwang
MS, Darling DS, Coleman IM, Nelson PS, Nguyen HM, Corey E, Tewari M, Morrissey C,
Vessella RL, Knudsen BS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington; Department of Biology, Hope College, Holland, Michigan.

Expression of E-cadherin is used to monitor the epithelial phenotype, and its
loss is suggestive of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT triggers tumor
metastasis. Exit from EMT is marked by increased E-cadherin expression and is
considered necessary for tumor growth at sites of metastasis; however, the
mechanisms associated with exit from EMT are poorly understood. Herein are
analyzed 185 prostate cancer metastases, with significantly higher E-cadherin
expression in bone than in lymph node and soft tissue metastases. To determine
the molecular mechanisms of regulation of E-cadherin expression, three stable
isogenic cell lines from DU145 were derived that differ in structure, migration, 
and colony formation on soft agar and Matrigel. When injected into mouse tibia,
the epithelial subline grows most aggressively, whereas the mesenchymal subline
does not grow. In cultured cells, ZEB1 and Src family kinases decrease E-cadherin
expression. In contrast, in tibial xenografts, E-cadherin RNA levels increase
eight- to 10-fold despite persistent ZEB1 expression, and in all ZEB1-positive
metastases (10 of 120), ZEB1 and E-cadherin proteins were co-expressed. These
data suggest that transcriptional regulation of E-cadherin differs in cultured
cells versus xenografts, which more faithfully reflect E-cadherin regulation in
cancers in human beings. Furthermore, the aggressive nature of xenografts
positive for E-cadherin and the frequency of metastases positive for E-cadherin
suggest that high E-cadherin expression in metastatic prostate cancer is
associated with aggressive tumor growth.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3123858
PMID: 21703419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 10;13(3):110. doi: 10.1186/bcr2885.

miR-200c at the nexus of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, resistance to
apoptosis, and the breast cancer stem cell phenotype.

Radisky DC.

Comment on
    Breast Cancer Res. 2011;13(2):R45.

Decreased expression of miRNAs of the miR-200 family has been implicated in the
growth and metastasis of breast cancer cells. Of this family, miR-200c has
garnered particular attention as a consequence of its ability to target ZEB1 and 
ZEB2, mediators of epithelial- mesenchymal transition. An article in the previous
issue of Breast Cancer Research identifies additional targets of miR-200c that
link increased cancer cell invasiveness, resistance to apoptosis, and induction
of breast cancer stem cell characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3218941
PMID: 21682933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Ren Fail. 2011;33(6):600-8. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2011.585416.

Effect of 5/6 nephrectomized rat serum on epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in
vitro.

Lu Z(1), Xie Y, Liu X, Cui S, Wu Y, Cai C, Zhang L, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the 5/6 nephrectomized (5/6Nx) rats' 12-week
serum could lead to tubular epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and its
molecular mechanism, so as to probe the potential stimulation from circulation in
chronic progressive kidney disease.
METHODS: A total of 24 Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were randomly divided into two
groups: sham operation group (sham group) and 5/6Nx group. Rats were killed 12
weeks after surgery to obtain 5/6Nx rats' 12-week serum. Then we detected the
expression of E-cadherin in renal tubular epithelial cells of the remaining
kidney and we investigated whether the 12th week serum of 5/6Nx rats could cause 
HK-2 (human kidney proximal tubular cell line) cells to transdifferentiate into
fibroblasts.
RESULTS: Our data confirmed that E-cadherin expression decreased significantly in
the remaining kidney at 12 weeks, and the 5/6Nx rats' 12-week serum could
suppress E-cadherin protein and mRNA expression (p < 0.05). We also found that
the 5/6Nx rats' 12-week serum could upregulate ZEB1, ß-catenin, and wnt3 protein 
expression (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that the 5/6Nx rats' 12-week serum could
suppress the expression of E-cadherin in HK-2 cells. It was partially through
modulating the increase of ZEB1. The loss of E-cadherin could lead ß-catenin to
localize to the cytoplasm and nucleus, and feed into the Wnt signaling pathway.
It means that the pathogenic serum in chronic kidney disease (CKD) plays an
important role in the loss of renal function and turns to be a new avenue of
research with potential clinical implications.

PMCID: PMC3131000
PMID: 21663389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2011 Oct;28(7):593-614. doi: 10.1007/s10585-011-9394-8. Epub
2011 Jun 4.

Inducible expression of TGFß, snail and Zeb1 recapitulates EMT in vitro and in
vivo in a NSCLC model.

Argast GM(1), Krueger JS, Thomson S, Sujka-Kwok I, Carey K, Silva S, O'Connor M, 
Mercado P, Mulford IJ, Young GD, Sennello R, Wild R, Pachter JA, Kan JL, Haley J,
Rosenfeld-Franklin M, Epstein DM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Translational Research, Biochemical and Cellular Pharmacology
and In Vivo Pharmacology, OSI Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Farmingdale, NY 11735, USA. 
gargast@osip.com

The progression of cancer from non-metastatic to metastatic is the critical
transition in the course of the disease. The epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) is a mechanism by which tumor cells acquire characteristics that improve
metastatic efficiency. Targeting EMT processes in patients is therefore a
potential strategy to block the transition to metastatic cancer and improve
patient outcome. To develop models of EMT applicable to in vitro and in vivo
settings, we engineered NCI-H358 non-small cell lung carcinoma cells to inducibly
express three well-established drivers of EMT: activated transforming growth
factor ß (aTGFß), Snail or Zeb1. We characterized the morphological, molecular
and phenotypic changes induced by each of the drivers and compared the different 
end-states of EMT between the models. Both in vitro and in vivo, induction of the
transgenes Snail and Zeb1 resulted in downregulation of epithelial markers and
upregulation of mesenchymal markers, and reduced the ability of the cells to
proliferate. Induced autocrine expression of aTGFß caused marker and phenotypic
changes consistent with EMT, a modest effect on growth rate, and a shift to a
more invasive phenotype. In vivo, this manifested as tumor cell infiltration of
the surrounding mouse stromal tissue. Overall, Snail and Zeb1 were sufficient to 
induce EMT in the cells, but aTGFß induced a more complex EMT, in which changes
in extracellular matrix remodeling components were pronounced.

PMID: 21643654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Br J Cancer. 2011 Jul 12;105(2):263-71. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.194. Epub 2011 May 
31.

NF-<U+03BA>B mediates the 12(S)-HETE-induced endothelial to mesenchymal transition of
lymphendothelial cells during the intravasation of breast carcinoma cells.

Vonach C(1), Viola K, Giessrigl B, Huttary N, Raab I, Kalt R, Krieger S, Vo TP,
Madlener S, Bauer S, Marian B, Hämmerle M, Kretschy N, Teichmann M, Hantusch B,
Stary S, Unger C, Seelinger M, Eger A, Mader R, Jäger W, Schmidt W, Grusch M,
Dolznig H, Mikulits W, Krupitza G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer
Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The intravasation of breast cancer into the lymphendothelium is an
early step of metastasis. Little is known about the mechanisms of bulky cancer
invasion into lymph ducts.
METHODS: To particularly address this issue, we developed a 3-dimensional
co-culture model involving MCF-7 breast cancer cell spheroids and
telomerase-immortalised human lymphendothelial cell (LEC) monolayers, which
resembles intravasation in vivo and correlated the malignant phenotype with
specific protein expression of LECs.
RESULTS: We show that tumour spheroids generate 'circular chemorepellent-induced 
defects' (CCID) in LEC monolayers through retraction of LECs, which was induced
by 12(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (HETE) secreted by MCF-7 spheroids. This
12(S)-HETE-regulated retraction of LECs during intravasation particularly allowed
us to investigate the key regulators involved in the motility and plasticity of
LECs. In all, 12(S)-HETE induced pro-metastatic protein expression patterns and
showed NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent up-regulation of the mesenchymal marker protein S100A4 and
of transcriptional repressor ZEB1 concomittant with down-regulation of the
endothelial adherence junction component VE-cadherin. This was in accordance with
~50% attenuation of CCID formation by treatment of cells with 10<U+2009>µM Bay11-7082.
Notably, 12(S)-HETE-induced VE-cadherin repression was regulated by either NF-<U+03BA>B 
or by ZEB1 since ZEB1 siRNA knockdown abrogated not only 12(S)-HETE-mediated
VE-cadherin repression but inhibited VE-cadherin expression in general.
INTERPRETATION: These data suggest an endothelial to mesenchymal transition-like 
process of LECs, which induces single cell motility during endothelial
transmigration of breast carcinoma cells. In conclusion, this study demonstrates 
that the 12(S)-HETE-induced intravasation of MCF-7 spheroids through LECs require
an NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent process of LECs triggering the disintegration of cell-cell
contacts, migration, and the generation of CCID.

PMCID: PMC3142797
PMID: 21629247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Sep;131(9):1877-85. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.142. Epub 2011 
May 19.

Transcriptional activation of ZEB1 by Slug leads to cooperative regulation of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition-like phenotype in melanoma.

Wels C(1), Joshi S, Koefinger P, Bergler H, Schaider H.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Unit, Department of Dermatology, Medical University Graz, Graz,
Austria.

The E-box-binding zinc finger transcription factors Slug and ZEB1 are important
repressors of E-cadherin, contributing to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
in primary epithelial cancers. Activator or repressor status of EMT transcription
factors defines consequences for tumorigenesis. We show that changes in
expression levels of Slug in melanoma cell lines lead to concomitant alterations 
of ZEB1 expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift, luciferase reporter, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays identified Slug as a direct transcriptional 
activator at E-boxes of the ZEB1 promoter. Transcriptional activation of ZEB1 was
demonstrated to be specific for Slug, as EMT regulators Snail and Twist failed to
influence ZEB1 expression. Slug and ZEB1 cooperatively repressed E-cadherin
expression resulting in decreased adhesion to human keratinocytes, but promoted
migration of melanoma cells. Our results show that the transcriptional activity
of ZEB1 is increased by Slug, suggesting a hierarchical organized expression of
EMT transcription factors through directed activation, triggering an EMT-like
process in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC3182526
PMID: 21593765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(15):7836-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01197-10. Epub 2011 May 18.

Transforming growth factor beta-induced reactivation of Epstein-Barr virus
involves multiple Smad-binding elements cooperatively activating expression of
the latent-lytic switch BZLF1 gene.

Iempridee T(1), Das S, Xu I, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706-1599, USA.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) physiologically induces Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) lytic infection by activating the expression of EBV's latent-lytic switch
BZLF1 gene. Liang et al. (J. Biol. Chem. 277:23345-23357, 2002) previously
identified a Smad-binding element (SBE) within the BZLF1 promoter, Zp; however,
it accounts for only 20 to 30% of TGF-ß-mediated activation of transcription from
Zp. Here, we identified additional factors responsible for the rest of this
activation. The incubation of EBV-positive MutuI cells with a TGF-ß neutralizing 
antibody or inhibitors of the TGF-ß type I receptor (TßRI) or Smad3 eliminated
the TGF-ß-induced reactivation of EBV. The coexpression of Smad2, Smad3, and
Smad4 together with a constitutively active form of TßRI induced 15- to 25-fold
transcription from Zp in gastric carcinoma AGS cells. By electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, we identified four additional Smad-binding elements, named SBE2 to 
SBE5. Substitution mutations in individual SBEs reduced Smad-mediated activation 
of Zp by 20 to 60%; together, these mutations essentially eliminated it.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that Smad4 newly bound the Zp
region of the EBV genome following the incubation of MutuI cells with TGF-ß. SBE2
overlaps the ZEB-binding ZV silencing element of Zp. Depending upon
posttranslational modifications, Smad4 either competed with ZEB1 for binding or
formed a complex with ZEB1 on the Zp ZV element in a cell-free assay system. In
transiently transfected cells, exogenously expressed ZEB1 inhibited Smad-mediated
transcriptional activation from Zp. We conclude that TGF-ß induces EBV lytic
reactivation via the canonical Smad pathway by activating BZLF1 gene expression
through multiple SBEs acting in concert.

PMCID: PMC3147924
PMID: 21593157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 May;19(5):1700-6. doi: 10.1245/s10434-011-1772-6. Epub 2011 
May 17.

Clinicopathological significance of ZEB1 protein in patients with hepatocellular 
carcinoma.

Zhou YM(1), Cao L, Li B, Zhang RX, Sui CJ, Yin ZF, Yang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreato-Vascular Surgery, First Affiliated
Hospital of Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.

BACKGROUND: ZEB1, a member of the ZFH family of proteins (zinc-finger E-box
binding homeobox), plays a central role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) during carcinogenesis. In this study, we investigated the expression of
ZEB1 in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its clinical effects
with underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: Expression levels of ZEB1 were assessed by Western blot in 5 HCC cell
lines and in paired cancerous and noncancerous tissues from 110 patients with
HCC. Short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) interference for ZEB1 was performed in MHCC-97H
cell line.
RESULTS: ZEB1 protein was detected at a relatively high level in metastatic human
HCC cell lines (MHCC-97L and MHCC-97H) when compared with that in nonmetastatic
HCC cell lines (Hep3B, PLC and Huh-7). ZEB1 was expressed at high levels in 72 of
110 HCC patients (65.4%) and correlated with advanced TNM stage, tumor size >5
cm, intrahepatic metastasis, vascular invasion, and frequent early recurrence.
The results of multivariate analysis revealed that ZEB1 high expression was a
significant prognostic factor for poor overall and disease-free survivals.
Silencing ZEB1 resulted in significant suppression of motility of MHCC-97H cell
line, which was accompanied with increased expression of the epithelial marker
E-cadherin and decreased expression of the mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and
vimentin. Furthermore, silencing ZEB1 prevented the spread of intrahepatic
metastasis and increased overall survival in mouse orthotopic tumor models.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that ZEB1 high expression was correlated with HCC
malignant progression and subsequent poor patient survival by induction of EMT
changes.

PMID: 21584833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab. 2011 May;6(3):469-482.

Androgen regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in prostate
tumorigenesis.

Matuszak EA(1), Kyprianou N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA ; Department of Surgery/Urology, University of Kentucky 
College of Medicine, KY, USA.

Prostate cancer patient mortality is ascribed to the spread of cancerous cells to
areas outside the prostate gland and the inability of current treatment
strategies to effectively block progression to metastasis. Understanding the
cellular mechanisms contributing to the dissemination of malignant cells and
metastasis is critically significant to the generation of effective therapeutic
modalities for improved patient survival while combating therapeutic resistance. 
In recent years, the phenomenon of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMTs) has 
received considerable attention due to accumulating evidence indicating a role
for this developmentally conserved process in tumorigenesis. Cancer cells at the 
invasive edges of tumors undergo EMT under the influence of contextual signals
that they receive from the microenvironment, such as TGF-ß. Also derived from
developmental studies is the fact that EMT induction is reversible; thus, upon
removal of EMT-inducing signals, cells occasionally revert to the epithelial
state of their cellular ancestors via the process of mesenchymal-epithelial
transition. This article discusses the current evidence supporting a central role
for EMT and its reverse process, mesenchymal-epithelial transition, in the
metastatic progression of prostate cancer to advanced disease and the involvement
of androgen signaling in its regulation towards the development of
castration-resistant prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3648215
PMID: 23667383  [PubMed]


296. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Oct;18(10):1628-39. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.42. Epub 2011
Apr 29.

miR-200c is upregulated by oxidative stress and induces endothelial cell
apoptosis and senescence via ZEB1 inhibition.

Magenta A(1), Cencioni C, Fasanaro P, Zaccagnini G, Greco S, Sarra-Ferraris G,
Antonini A, Martelli F, Capogrossi MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Patologia Vascolare, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata -
IRCCS, Via dei Monti di Creta 104, 00167 Roma, Italy.

We examined the effect of reactive oxygen species (ROS) on MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
expression in endothelial cells in vitro, and in mouse skeletal muscle following 
acute hindlimb ischemia. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
exposed to 200<U+2009>µM hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) for 8 to 24<U+2009>h; miRNAs profiling
showed that miR-200c and the co-transcribed miR-141 increased more than
eightfold. The other miR-200 gene family members were also induced, albeit to a
lower level. Furthermore, miR-200c upregulation was not endothelium restricted,
and occurred also on exposure to an oxidative stress-inducing drug: 1,3-bis(2
chloroethyl)-1nitrosourea (BCNU). miR-200c overexpression induced HUVEC growth
arrest, apoptosis and senescence; these phenomena were also induced by H(2)O(2)
and were partially rescued by miR-200c inhibition. Moreover, miR-200c target ZEB1
messenger RNA and protein were downmodulated by H(2)O(2) and by miR-200c
overexpression. ZEB1 knockdown recapitulated miR-200c-induced responses, and
expression of a ZEB1 allele non-targeted by miR-200c, prevented miR-200c
phenotype. The mechanism of H(2)O(2)-mediated miR-200c upregulation involves p53 
and retinoblastoma proteins. Acute hindlimb ischemia enhanced miR-200c in
wild-type mice skeletal muscle, whereas in p66(ShcA -/-) mice, which display
lower levels of oxidative stress after ischemia, upregulation of miR-200c was
markedly inhibited. In conclusion, ROS induce miR-200c and other miR-200 family
members; the ensuing downmodulation of ZEB1 has a key role in ROS-induced
apoptosis and senescence.

PMCID: PMC3172120
PMID: 21527937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Cell Sci. 2011 May 15;124(Pt 10):1752-8. doi: 10.1242/jcs.084194. Epub 2011 Apr
26.

CCN6 (WISP3) decreases ZEB1-mediated EMT and invasion by attenuation of IGF-1
receptor signaling in breast cancer.

Lorenzatti G(1), Huang W, Pal A, Cabanillas AM, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)CIBICI-CONICET, Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias
Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, 5000 Córdoba, Argentina.

During progression of breast cancer, CCN6 protein exerts tumor inhibitory
functions. CCN6 is a secreted protein that modulates the insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1) signaling pathway. Knockdown of CCN6 in benign mammary
epithelial cells triggers an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), with
upregulation of the transcription factor ZEB1/dEF1. How CCN6 regulates ZEB1
expression is unknown. We hypothesized that CCN6 might regulate ZEB1, EMT and
breast cancer invasion by modulating IGF-1 signaling. Exogenously added human
recombinant CCN6 protein was sufficient to downregulate ZEB1 mRNA and protein
levels in CCN6-deficient (CCN6 KD) HME cells and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. 
Recombinant CCN6 protein decreased invasion of CCN6 KD cells compared with
controls. We discovered that knockdown of CCN6 induced IGF-1 secretion in HME
cells cultivated in serum-free medium to higher concentrations than found in
MDA-MB-231 cells. Treatment with recombinant CCN6 protein was sufficient to
decrease IGF-1 protein and mRNA to control levels, rescuing the effect of CCN6
knockdown. Specific inhibition of IGF-1 receptors using the pharmacological
inhibitor NVP-AE541 or short hairpin shRNAs revealed that ZEB1 upregulation due
to knockdown of CCN6 requires activation of IGF-1 receptor signaling. Recombinant
CCN6 blunted IGF-1-induced ZEB1 upregulation in MDA-MB-231 cells. Our data define
a pathway in which CCN6 attenuates IGF-1 signaling to decrease ZEB1 expression
and invasion in breast cancer. These results suggest that CCN6 could be a target 
to prevent or halt breast cancer invasion.

PMCID: PMC3085438
PMID: 21525039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Exp Med. 2011 May 9;208(5):875-83. doi: 10.1084/jem.20110235. Epub 2011 Apr 25.

p53 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition through microRNAs targeting ZEB1 
and ZEB2.

Kim T(1), Veronese A, Pichiorri F, Lee TJ, Jeon YJ, Volinia S, Pineau P, Marchio 
A, Palatini J, Suh SS, Alder H, Liu CG, Dejean A, Croce CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, 2 Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology
Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

p53 suppresses tumor progression and metastasis. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is a key process in tumor progression and metastasis. The
transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2 promote EMT. Here, we show that p53
suppresses EMT by repressing expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2. By profiling 92 primary
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and 9 HCC cell lines, we found that p53
up-regulates microRNAs (miRNAs), including miR-200 and miR-192 family members.
The miR-200 family members transactivated by p53 then repress ZEB1/2 expression. 
p53-regulated miR-192 family members also repress ZEB2 expression. Inhibition or 
overexpression of the miRNAs affects p53-regulated EMT by altering ZEB1 and ZEB2 
expression. Our findings indicate that p53 can regulate EMT, and that
p53-regulated miRNAs are critical mediators of p53-regulated EMT.

PMCID: PMC3092351
PMID: 21518799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Sep;112(9):2296-306. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23150.

Over-expression of FoxM1 leads to epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer
stem cell phenotype in pancreatic cancer cells.

Bao B(1), Wang Z, Ali S, Kong D, Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Li Y, Azmi AS, Miele L,
Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

FoxM1 is known to play important role in the development and progression of many 
malignancies including pancreatic cancer. Studies have shown that the acquisition
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype and induction of cancer
stem cell (CSC) or cancer stem-like cell phenotypes are highly inter-related, and
contributes to drug resistance, tumor recurrence, and metastasis. The molecular
mechanism(s) by which FoxM1 contributes to the acquisition of EMT phenotype and
induction of CSC self-renewal capacity is poorly understood. Therefore, we
established FoxM1 over-expressing pancreatic cancer (AsPC-1) cells, which showed 
increased cell growth, clonogenicity, and cell migration. Moreover,
over-expression of FoxM1 led to the acquisition of EMT phenotype by activation of
mesenchymal cell markers, ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail2, E-cadherin, and vimentin, which is 
consistent with increased sphere-forming (pancreatospheres) capacity and
expression of CSC surface markers (CD44 and EpCAM). We also found that
over-expression of FoxM1 led to decreased expression of miRNAs (let-7a, let-7b,
let-7c, miR-200b, and miR-200c); however, re-expression of miR-200b inhibited the
expression of ZEB1, ZEB2, vimentin as well as FoxM1, and induced the expression
of E-cadherin, leading to the reversal of EMT phenotype. Finally, we found that
genistein, a natural chemo-preventive agent, inhibited cell growth,
clonogenicity, cell migration and invasion, EMT phenotype, and formation of
pancreatospheres consistent with reduced expression of CD44 and EpCAM. These
results suggest, for the first time, that FoxM1 over-expression is responsible
for the acquisition of EMT and CSC phenotype, which is in part mediated through
the regulation of miR-200b and these processes, could be easily attenuated by
genistein.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3155646
PMID: 21503965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Sep;112(9):2210-7. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23148.

Comprehensive patterns in microRNA regulation of transcription factors during
tumor metastasis.

Reshmi G(1), Sona C, Pillai MR.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Cancer Research Program, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram 695014, Kerala, India.

In spite of a large body of information about the upstream regulators of
metastasis, a process that often plays a limiting factor in therapeutic outcome
of cancer patients, the impact of regulatory microRNA patterns remains obscure.
This review describes computational analysis of coordinated regulation of genes
by di-directional regulation of microRNA and transcription factors that
specifically regulate the process of metastasis. We discovered several unexpected
modes of regulatory patterns between microRNAs and transcription factors. For
example, we found a double positive feedback loop regulated by the hub
transcription factor ZEB1 and miR-200 during epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
This review further explains flow of information and how such components
coordinate various adaptable controls of microRNAs and thus, contribute to
regulation of transcription factors in context of cancer metastasis. Information 
described here provides a regulatory framework for future experimental analyses
and discoveries of new insights into post-transcriptional gene regulation at the 
microRNA level in cancer metastasis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21503963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 18;13(2):R45. doi: 10.1186/bcr2867.

Targets of miR-200c mediate suppression of cell motility and anoikis resistance.

Howe EN(1), Cochrane DR, Richer JK.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cancer Biology, Department of Pathology, University of Colorado,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Mail Stop 8104, PO Box 6511, Aurora, CO, USA.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2011;13(3):110.

INTRODUCTION: miR-200c and other members of the miR-200 family promote epithelial
identity by directly targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2, which repress E-cadherin and other 
genes involved in polarity. Loss of miR-200c is often observed in carcinoma cells
that have undergone epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Restoration of
miR-200c to such cells leads to a reduction in stem cell-like characteristics,
reduced migration and invasion, and increased sensitivity to taxanes. Here we
investigate the functional role of novel targets of miR-200c in the aggressive
behavior of breast and endometrial cancer cells.
METHODS: Putative target genes of miR-200c identified by microarray profiling
were validated as direct targets using dual luciferase reporter assays. Following
restoration of miR-200c to triple negative breast cancer and type 2 endometrial
cancer cell lines that had undergone EMT, levels of endogenous target mRNA and
respective protein products were measured. Migration and sensitivity to anoikis
were determined using wound healing assays or cell-death ELISAs and viability
assays respectively.
RESULTS: We found that restoration of miR-200c suppresses anoikis resistance, a
novel function for this influential miRNA. We identified novel targets of
miR-200c, including genes encoding fibronectin 1 (FN1), moesin (MSN),
neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase type 2 (NTRK2 or TrkB), leptin receptor
(LEPR), and Rho GTPase activating protein 19 (ARHGAP19). These targets all encode
proteins normally expressed in cells of mesenchymal or neuronal origin; however, 
in carcinoma cells that lack miR-200c they become aberrantly expressed and
contribute to the EMT phenotype and aggressive behavior. We showed that these
targets are inhibited upon restoration of miR-200c to aggressive breast and
endometrial cancer cells. We demonstrated that inhibition of MSN and/or FN1 is
sufficient to mediate the ability of miR-200c to suppress cell migration. Lastly,
we showed that targeting of TrkB mediates the ability of miR-200c to restore
anoikis sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-200c maintains the epithelial phenotype not only by targeting
ZEB1/2, which usually facilitates restoration of E-cadherin expression, but also 
by actively repressing a program of mesenchymal and neuronal genes involved in
cell motility and anoikis resistance.

PMCID: PMC3219208
PMID: 21501518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cell Cycle. 2011 Apr 15;10(8):1312-21. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

p53-dependent regulation of growth, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
stemness in normal pancreatic epithelial cells.

Pinho AV(1), Rooman I, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Patología Molecular, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1715.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Aug 15;10(16):2616-7.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1717.

Pancreatic acinar cells acquire in vitro a pancreatic progenitor phenotype
associated with activation of p53, growth arrest and senescence. A similar
program is also activated in chronic pancreatitis. To assess the mechanisms
involved in this process, we cultured pancreatic acinar cells from wild-type,
p53(-/-), p16(-/-) and p21(-/-) mice. Cultures from p53(-/-) mice, but not those 
from p16(-/-) or p21(-/-) mice, display an enhanced proliferation and can be
expanded continuously for more than 20 passages. p53(-/-) cells also display
features of stemness such as enhanced sphere formation, increased expression of
pancreatic multipotent progenitor markers (Ptf1a, Pdx1, Cpa1, c-myc, Sox9 and
Hnf1b), and of the stemness regulators Bmi1 and Klf4. Upon subculture, p53(-/-)
cells undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and express high levels 
of vimentin and of the transcriptional regulators Snai1, Snai2, Twist, Zeb1 and
Zeb2. Genetic lineage tracing unequivocally demonstrates the epithelial origin of
the cells with mesenchymal phenotype. These cells express the endodermal markers 
Hhex, Pdx1, Sox9, Hnf1b, Foxa2, Gata6 and Sox17, and the stem cell markers c-myc,
Bmi1 and Klf4. Cultures from p53(+/-) mice display intermediate levels of the
transcription factors involved in EMT but do not surpass the growth arrest. Our
findings support the notion that p53 controls both growth and epithelial cell
differentiation in the pancreas. These observations have important implications
regarding the mechanisms through which p53 inactivation in tumors may be
associated with aggressive biological behavior.

PMID: 21490434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 1;30(35):3735-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.96. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Zeb1 is required for TrkB-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition, anoikis
resistance and metastasis.

Smit MA(1), Peeper DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

Anoikis (detachment-induced apoptosis) prevents the survival of cells at
inappropriate sites of the body and can therefore act as a barrier to metastasis.
In a function-based genome-wide screen, we have previously identified the
neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor TrkB as a potent suppressor of anoikis.
Consistently, activated TrkB oncogenically transforms non-malignant epithelial
cells and causes them to invade and produce metastatic tumors in vivo.
Overexpression of activated TrkB also results in morphological transformation,
resembling epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). E-cadherin, an important EMT 
regulator, and two E-cadherin repressors, Twist and Snail, are critical for these
TrkB functions. As Snail has been shown to induce Zeb1, another E-cadherin
repressor, we hypothesized that Zeb1 could be a TrkB target, too. We show here
that Zeb1 is required for TrkB-induced EMT in epithelial cells, as RNAi-mediated 
knockdown of Zeb1 reverted the morphological changes induced by TrkB.
Furthermore, Zeb1 is involved in TrkB-induced anoikis resistance, migration and
invasion. In vivo, knockdown of Zeb1 strongly reduced TrkB-induced metastasis.
Finally, epistasis experiments showed that Zeb1 acts downstream of Twist and
Snail. We conclude that Zeb1 is required for several TrkB-induced effects in
vitro and in vivo, including metastasis.

PMID: 21478908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2011 Nov;12(11):1891-9.

Is the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition clinically relevant for the cancer
patient?

Krasnapolski MA(1), Todaro LB, de Kier Joffé EB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Area, Institute of Oncology Angel H Roffo, University of Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. mkrasnapolski@gmail.com

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a transdifferentiation process by
which a fully differentiated epithelial cell acquires mesenchymal traits, and
therefore, mesenchymal abilities such as motility and invasiveness. It is a
pivotal physiological process involved in embryogenesis (Type 1 EMT) and in wound
healing and tissue remodeling (Type 2 EMT), which, some authors claim, but there 
are still some controversies, has also been co-opted by tumor cells to increase
their malignant potential (Type 3 EMT). Many biomarkers of Type 3 EMT have been
characterized and classified into functional categories (i.e., extracellular
proteins, cell surface molecules, cytoskeletal markers, transcriptional factors, 
and, recently, micro RNAs). The extra and intracellular signals that lead to EMT 
are only starting to be understood, but there is a consensus that Ras and
TGF-beta signaling must converge with NF-<U+03BA>B in order to achieve a full EMT. The
most classical experimental model is the induction of EMT by TGF-beta in cultures
of epithelial cells. Other pathways involving GSK3b, and Wnt/beta-catenin, are
also implicated. Ultimately, every EMT-inducing pathway will activate any of the 
E-cadherin transcriptional repressors (ZEB1, ZEB2, Twist, Snail or Slug).
Although in the pre-clinical setting, EMT has also been related to an accelerated
tumor progression and to an increased resistance to conventional chemotherapy. In
this sense, several groups are beginning to use EMT as a predictive marker of
response to treatment. Finally, two chemicals targeting TGF-beta are in clinical 
trials and many laboratories have initiated studies to use other EMT-related
molecules as a therapeutic target for the cancer patient with some modest, but
encouraging results.

PMID: 21470129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cancer Lett. 2011 Aug 1;307(1):26-36. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.03.012. Epub
2011 Apr 3.

Notch-1 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition consistent with cancer stem
cell phenotype in pancreatic cancer cells.

Bao B(1), Wang Z, Ali S, Kong D, Li Y, Ahmad A, Banerjee S, Azmi AS, Miele L,
Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.

Activation of Notch-1 is known to be associated with the development and
progression of human malignancies including pancreatic cancer. Emerging evidence 
suggest that the acquisition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype
and induction of cancer stem cell (CSC) or cancer stem-like cell phenotype are
interrelated and contributes to tumor recurrence and drug resistance. The
molecular mechanism(s) by which Notch-1 contributes to the acquisition of EMT
phenotype and CSC self-renewal capacity has not been fully elucidated. Here we
show that forced over-expression of Notch-1 leads to increased cell growth,
clonogenicity, migration and invasion of AsPC-1 cells. Moreover, over-expression 
of Notch-1 led to the induction of EMT phenotype by activation of mesenchymal
cell markers such as ZEB1, CD44, EpCAM, and Hes-1. Here we also report, for the
first time, that over-expression of Notch-1 leads to increased expression of
miR-21, and decreased expression of miR-200b, miR-200c, let-7a, let-7b, and
let-7c. Re-expression of miR-200b led to decreased expression of ZEB1, and
vimentin, and increased expression of E-cadherin. Over-expression of Notch-1 also
increased the formation of pancreatospheres consistent with expression of CSC
surface markers CD44 and EpCAM. Finally, we found that genistein, a known natural
anti-tumor agent inhibited cell growth, clonogenicity, migration, invasion, EMT
phenotype, formation of pancreatospheres and expression of CD44 and EpCAM. These 
results suggest that the activation of Notch-1 signaling contributes to the
acquisition of EMT phenotype, which is in part mediated through the regulation of
miR-200b and CSC self-renewal capacity, and these processes could be attenuated
by genistein treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3104092
PMID: 21463919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Feb 28;17(8):1036-44. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i8.1036.

miR-200 family expression is downregulated upon neoplastic progression of
Barrett's esophagus.

Smith CM(1), Watson DI, Leong MP, Mayne GC, Michael MZ, Wijnhoven BP, Hussey DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia,
Australia.

AIM: To investigate miR-200 family expression in Barrett's epithelium, gastric
and duodenal epithelia, and esophageal adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was used to
measure miR-200, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of miR-200 
targets was used to predict biological outcomes.
RESULTS: Barrett's epithelium expressed lower levels of miR-141 and miR-200c than
did gastric and duodenal epithelia (P < 0.001). In silico analysis indicated
roles for the miR-200 family in molecular pathways that distinguish Barrett's
epithelium from gastric and duodenal epithelia, and which control apoptosis and
proliferation. All miR-200 members were downregulated in adenocarcinoma (P <
0.02), and miR-200c expression was also downregulated in non-invasive epithelium 
adjacent to adenocarcinoma (P < 0.02). The expression of all miR-200 members was 
lower in Barrett's epithelium derived high-grade dysplastic cell lines than in a 
cell line derived from benign Barrett's epithelium. We observed significant
inverse correlations between miR-200 family expression and ZEB1 and ZEB2
expression in Barrett's epithelium and esophageal adenocarcinoma (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: miR-200 expression might contribute to the anti-apoptotic and
proliferative phenotype of Barrett's epithelium and regulate key neoplastic
processes in this epithelium.

PMCID: PMC3057147
PMID: 21448356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1888-93. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.066. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

ZEB1 is estrogen responsive in vitro in human foreskin cells and is over
expressed in penile skin in patients with severe hypospadias.

Qiao L(1), Tasian GE, Zhang H, Cunha GR, Baskin L.

Author information: 
(1)Frank Hinman, Jr. Urological Research Laboratory, Department of Urology,
University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

PURPOSE: We determined the effect of estrogen on ZEB1 in vitro and tested the
hypothesis that ZEB1 is over expressed in the penile skin of subjects with
hypospadias.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hs68 cells, a fibroblast cell line derived from human
foreskin, were exposed to 0, 1, 10 and 100 nM estrogen, and the expression level 
of ZEB1 was assessed using reverse transcription real-time polymerase chain
reaction, Western blot and immunocytochemical analysis. Next, preputial skin was 
prospectively collected from case and control subjects at hypospadias repair (37 
cases) and circumcision (11). Hypospadias was classified as severe (13 cases) or 
mild (24) based on the position of the urethral meatus. ZEB1 expression was
quantified using reverse transcription real-time polymerase chain reaction,
Western blot and immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: Estrogen increased ZEB1 expression at the mRNA and protein levels in
Hs68 cells in a concentration dependent fashion (p <0.01). Subjects with severe
hypospadias had significantly higher ZEB1 mRNA levels and protein expression
compared to controls or subjects with mild hypospadias (both p <0.01). Subjects
with severe hypospadias had increased expression of ZEB1 in the basal layers of
the preputial epidermis.
CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen increases ZEB1 expression in a human foreskin fibroblast
cell line in vitro. Furthermore, ZEB1 is significantly over expressed in the
penile skin of subjects with severe hypospadias. We propose that ZEB1
overexpression may contribute to development of hypospadias and may mediate the
effect of estrogen on developing external male genitalia.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3428058
PMID: 21421232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1850-1. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.110. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

Editorial comment.

Braga LH.

Comment on
    J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1845-9.

PMID: 21420109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 May 15;22(10):1686-98. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-02-0103. Epub
2011 Mar 16.

An autocrine TGF-beta/ZEB/miR-200 signaling network regulates establishment and
maintenance of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Gregory PA(1), Bracken CP, Smith E, Bert AG, Wright JA, Roslan S, Morris M, Wyatt
L, Farshid G, Lim YY, Lindeman GJ, Shannon MF, Drew PA, Khew-Goodall Y, Goodall
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Immunology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a form of cellular plasticity that is 
critical for embryonic development and tumor metastasis. A double-negative
feedback loop involving the miR-200 family and ZEB (zinc finger E-box-binding
homeobox) transcription factors has been postulated to control the balance
between epithelial and mesenchymal states. Here we demonstrate using the
epithelial Madin Darby canine kidney cell line model that, although manipulation 
of the ZEB/miR-200 balance is able to repeatedly switch cells between epithelial 
and mesenchymal states, the induction and maintenance of a stable mesenchymal
phenotype requires the establishment of autocrine transforming growth factor-ß
(TGF-ß) signaling to drive sustained ZEB expression. Furthermore, we show that
prolonged autocrine TGF-ß signaling induced reversible DNA methylation of the
miR-200 loci with corresponding changes in miR-200 levels. Collectively, these
findings demonstrate the existence of an autocrine TGF-ß/ZEB/miR-200 signaling
network that regulates plasticity between epithelial and mesenchymal states. We
find a strong correlation between ZEBs and TGF-ß and negative correlations
between miR-200 and TGF-ß and between miR-200 and ZEBs, in invasive ductal
carcinomas, consistent with an autocrine TGF-ß/ZEB/miR-200 signaling network
being active in breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3093321
PMID: 21411626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Virol. 2011 Jun;85(11):5628-43. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02659-10. Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Valproic acid antagonizes the capacity of other histone deacetylase inhibitors to
activate the Epstein-barr virus lytic cycle.

Daigle D(1), Gradoville L, Tuck D, Schulz V, Wang'ondu R, Ye J, Gorres K, Miller 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520-8064, USA.

Diverse stimuli reactivate the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lytic cycle in Burkitt
lymphoma (BL) cells. In HH514-16 BL cells, two histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors, sodium butyrate (NaB) and trichostatin A (TSA), and the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor azacytidine (AzaCdR) promote lytic reactivation.
Valproic acid (VPA), which, like NaB, belongs to the short-chain fatty acid class
of HDAC inhibitors, fails to induce the EBV lytic cycle in these cells.
Nonetheless, VPA behaves as an HDAC inhibitor; it causes hyperacetylation of
histone H3 (J. K. Countryman, L. Gradoville, and G. Miller, J. Virol.
82:4706-4719, 2008). Here we show that VPA blocked the induction of EBV early
lytic proteins ZEBRA and EA-D in response to NaB, TSA, or AzaCdR. The block in
lytic activation occurred prior to the accumulation of BZLF1 transcripts.
Reactivation of EBV in Akata cells, in response to anti-IgG, and in Raji cells,
in response to tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA), was also inhibited by VPA.
MS-275 and apicidin, representing two additional classes of HDAC inhibitors, and 
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) reactivated EBV in HH514-16 cells; this
activity was also inhibited by VPA. Although VPA potently blocked the expression 
of viral lytic-cycle transcripts, it did not generally block the transcription of
cellular genes and was not toxic. The levels and kinetics of specific cellular
transcripts, such as Stat3, Frmd6, Mad1, Sepp1, c-fos, c-jun, and egr1, which
were activated by NaB and TSA, were similar in HH514-16 cells treated with VPA.
When combined with NaB or TSA, VPA did not inhibit the activation of these
cellular genes. Changes in cellular gene expression in response to VPA, NaB, or
TSA were globally similar as assessed by human genome arrays; however, VPA
selectively stimulated the expression of some cellular genes, such as MEF2D, YY1,
and ZEB1, that could repress the EBV lytic cycle. We describe a novel example of 
functional antagonism between HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3094991
PMID: 21411522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Kidney Int. 2011 Aug;80(4):358-68. doi: 10.1038/ki.2011.43. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

A microRNA circuit mediates transforming growth factor-ß1 autoregulation in renal
glomerular mesangial cells.

Kato M(1), Arce L, Wang M, Putta S, Lanting L, Natarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Diabetes Center, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California, USA. mkato@coh.org

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2011 Aug;80(4):334-7.

Enhanced transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) expression in renal cells
promotes fibrosis and hypertrophy during the progression of diabetic nephropathy.
The TGF-ß1 promoter is positively controlled by the E-box regulators, upstream
stimulatory factors (USFs), in response to diabetic (high glucose) conditions;
however, it is not clear whether TGF-ß1 is autoregulated by itself. As changes in
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in kidney disease, we tested their
involvement in this process. TGF-ß1 levels were found to be upregulated by
microRNA-192 (miR-192) or miR-200b/c in mouse mesangial cells. Amounts of
miR-200b/c were increased in glomeruli from type 1 (streptozotocin) and type 2
(db/db) diabetic mice, and in mouse mesangial cells treated with TGF-ß1 in vitro.
Levels of miR-200b/c were also upregulated by miR-192 in the mesangial cells,
suggesting that miR-200b/c are downstream of miR-192. Activity of the TGF-ß1
promoter was upregulated by TGF-ß1 or miR-192, demonstrating that the
miR-192-miR-200 cascade induces TGF-ß1 expression. TGF-ß1 increased the occupancy
of activators USF1 and Tfe3, and decreased that of the repressor Zeb1 on the
TGF-ß1 promoter E-box binding sites. Inhibitors of miR-192 decreased the
expression of miR-200b/c, Col1a2, Col4a1, and TGF-ß1 in mouse mesangial cells,
and in mouse kidney cortex. Thus, miRNA-regulated circuits may amplify TGF-ß1
signaling, accelerating chronic fibrotic diseases such as diabetic nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC3337779
PMID: 21389977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cancer Res. 2011 May 1;71(9):3400-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0965. Epub
2011 Mar 9.

Phosphoglucose isomerase/autocrine motility factor mediates
epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulated by miR-200 in breast cancer cells.

Ahmad A(1), Aboukameel A, Kong D, Wang Z, Sethi S, Chen W, Sarkar FH, Raz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

Phosphoglucose isomerase/autocrine motility factor (PGI/AMF) plays an important
role in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis and is associated with invasion and
metastasis of cancer cells. We have previously shown its role in the induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in breast cancer cells, which led to
increased aggressiveness; however, the molecular mechanism by which PGI/AMF
regulates EMT is not known. Here we show, for the first time, that PGI/AMF
overexpression led to an increase in the DNA-binding activity of NF-<U+03BA>B, which, in
turn, led to increased expression of ZEB1/ZEB2. The microRNA-200s (miR-200s)
miR-200a, miR-200b, and miR-200c are known to negatively regulate the expression 
of ZEB1/ZEB2, and we found that the expression of miR-200s was lost in PGI/AMF
overexpressing MCF-10A cells and in highly invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, which was
consistent with increased expression of ZEB1/ZEB2. Moreover, silencing of PGI/AMF
expression in MDA-MB-231 cells led to overexpression of miR-200s, which was
associated with reversal of EMT phenotype (i.e., mesenchymal-epithelial
transition), and these findings were consistent with alterations in the relative 
expression of epithelial (E-cadherin) and mesenchymal (vimentin, ZEB1, ZEB2)
markers and decreased aggressiveness as judged by clonogenic, motility, and
invasion assays. Moreover, either reexpression of miR-200 or silencing of PGI/AMF
suppressed pulmonary metastases of MDA-MB-231 cells in vivo, and anti-miR-200
treatment in vivo resulted in increased metastases. Collectively, these results
suggest a role of miR-200s in PGI/AMF-induced EMT and thus approaches for
upregulation of miR-200s could be a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment 
of highly invasive breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3085607
PMID: 21389093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. N Engl J Med. 2011 Mar 10;364(10):972-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcibr1100071.

How does progesterone relax the uterus in pregnancy?

Zakar T(1), Mesiano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, John Hunter Hospital, and Mothers
and Babies Research Centre, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

PMID: 21388317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Cancer. 2012 Feb 15;130(4):808-16. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26037. Epub 2011 Apr
27.

Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-inducing transcription factors in
primary breast cancer: The effect of neoadjuvant therapy.

Mego M(1), Mani SA, Lee BN, Li C, Evans KW, Cohen EN, Gao H, Jackson SA, Giordano
A, Hortobagyi GN, Cristofanilli M, Lucci A, Reuben JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Epithelial cancer cells are likely to undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) prior to entering the peripheral circulation. By undergoing EMT,
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) lose epithelial markers and may escape detection
by conventional methods. Therefore, we conducted a pilot study to investigate
mRNA transcripts of EMT-inducing transcription factors (TFs) in tumor cells from 
the peripheral blood (PB) of patients with primary breast cancer (PBC). PB
mononuclear cells were isolated from 52 patients with stages I-III PBC and 30
healthy donors (HDs) and were sequentially depleted of EpCAM(+) cells and CD45(+)
leukocytes, henceforth referred to as CD45(-). The expression levels of
EMT-inducing TFs (TWIST1, SNAIL1, SLUG, ZEB1 and FOXC2) in the CD45(-) cells were
determined using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The highest
level of expression by the CD45(-) cell fraction of HD was used as "cutoff" to
determine if samples from patients with PBC overexpressed any EMT-inducing TFs.
In total, 15.4% of patients with PBC overexpressed at least one of the
EMT-inducing TF transcripts. Overexpression of any EMT-inducing TF transcripts
was more likely to be detected in patients with PBC who received neoadjuvant
therapies (NAT) than patients who received no NAT (p = 0.003). Concurrently, CTCs
were detected in 7 of 38 (18.4%) patients by CellSearch® and in 15 of 42 (35.7%) 
patients by AdnaTest. There was no association between the presence of CTCs
measured by CellSearch® or AdnaTest. In summary, our results demonstrate that
CTCs with EMT phenotype may occur in the peripheral circulation of patients with 
PBC and that NAT is unable to eliminate CTCs undergoing EMT.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3169728
PMID: 21387303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(3):324-9.

Down-regulation of FXYD3 is induced by transforming growth factor-ß signaling via
ZEB1/dEF1 in human mammary epithelial cells.

Yamamoto H(1), Mukaisho K, Sugihara H, Hattori T, Asano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Shiga 5258577, Japan.

FXYD3, a regulator of Na, K-ATPase, was identified as an mRNA overexpressed in
murine breast cancers induced by neu oncogene, which had inactivated transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ß signaling due to the defect of TGF-ß receptor I (TßRI)
expression. To elucidate whether the expression of FXYD3 mRNA was regulated by
TGF-ß signaling, we used a normal human mammary epithelial cell line, MCF-10A
which responds to TGF-ß and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, followed by induction 
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we showed that FXYD3 at
plasma membrane in epithelial state of MCF-10A cells was decreased by treatment
of TGF-ß and TNF-a. The repression of FXYD3 mRNA induced by TGF-ß and TNF-a in
MCF-10A cells was abolished by TßRI inhibitor or Smad3 inhibitor, but not by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) for Smad2. In addition, expression level of FXYD3
mRNA was up-regulated by the silencing of ZEB1/dEF1 transcriptional repressor
which was a down-stream target gene of TGF-ß and an inducer of EMT. On the other 
hand, expression level and cellular localization of E-cadherin and N-cadherin
were not changed by siRNA for FXYD3 in MCF-10A and human breast cancer MCF-7
cells. These results suggest that FXYD3 is a target gene of TGF-ß signaling
through ZEB1/dEF1, but is not directly involved in EMT.

PMID: 21372379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int J Cancer. 2012 Feb 1;130(3):521-31. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26008. Epub 2011 May 28.

The importance of integrin-linked kinase in the regulation of bladder cancer
invasion.

Matsui Y(1), Assi K, Ogawa O, Raven PA, Dedhar S, Gleave ME, Salh B, So AI.

Author information: 
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

It is important to understand the molecular mechanisms of bladder cancer
progression not only to prevent cancer progression but also to detect new
therapeutic targets against advanced bladder cancer. The integrin-linked kinase
(ILK) is a major signaling integrator in mammalian cells and plays an important
role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of human cancers, but its
mechanisms are not completely understood. In this study, we investigated the
importance and mechanisms of ILK in bladder cancer progression. When the
expression of ILK in bladder cancer cell lines and N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)
nitrosamine (BBN)-induced murine bladder cancer was evaluated, ILK has a tendency
to be overexpressed in invasive cell lines and invasive BBN-induced murine
bladder cancer. Overexpression of ILK in 253J bladder cancer cells suppressed
E-cadherin expression, resulting in the promotion of cell invasion. Conversely,
ILK knockdown by siRNA suppresses cell invasion in invasive bladder cancer cells 
through the regulation of E-cadherin or matrix metalloprotease 9 (MMP-9). To
regulate E-cadherin expression, our results showed that the glycogen synthase
kinase 3ß (GSK3ß)-Zeb1 pathway may play an important role downstream of ILK.
Finally, the results of a human bladder tissue microarray (TMA) showed that ILK
expression correlates with the invasiveness of human bladder cancer. Our study
suggests that ILK is overexpressed in invasive bladder cancer and plays an
important role in the EMT of bladder cancer via the control of E-cadherin and
MMP-9 expression. ILK may be a new molecular target to suppress tumor progression
in advanced and high-risk bladder cancer patients.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21351095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. BMC Cancer. 2011 Feb 16;11:73. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-73.

Transcription factors zeb1, twist and snai1 in breast carcinoma.

Soini Y(1), Tuhkanen H, Sironen R, Virtanen I, Kataja V, Auvinen P, Mannermaa A, 
Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine,
Pathology and Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Eastern
Finland, Cancer Center of Eastern Finland, PO Box 1627, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.
ylermi.soini@uef.fi

BACKGROUND: Epitheliomesenchymal transition (EMT) is the process where cancer
cells attain fibroblastic features and are thus able to invade neighboring
tissues. Transcriptional factors zeb1, snai1 and twist regulate EMT.
METHODS: We used immunohistochemistry to investigate the expression of zeb1,
twist and snai1 in tumor and stromal compartments by in a large set of breast
carcinomas. The results were compared with estrogen and progesterone receptor
status, HER2 amplification, grade, histology, TNM status and survival of the
patients.
RESULTS: Nuclear expression for twist was seen in the epithelial tumor cell
compartment in 3.6% and for snai1 in 3.1% of the cases while zeb1 was not
detected at all in these areas. In contrast, the tumor stromal compartment showed
nuclear zeb1 and twist expression in 75% and 52.4% of the cases, respectively.
Although rare, nuclear expression of twist in the epithelial tumor cell
compartment was associated with a poor outcome of the patients (p = 0.054 log
rank, p = 0.013, Breslow, p = 0.025 Tarone-Ware). Expression of snai1, or
expression of zeb1 or twist in the stromal compartment did not have any
prognostic significance. Furthermore, none of these factors associated with the
size of the tumors, nor with the presence of axillary or distant metastases.
Expression of zeb1 and twist in the stromal compartment was positively associated
with a positive estrogen or progesterone receptor status of the tumors. Stromal
zeb1 expression was significantly lower in ductal in situ carcinomas than in
invasive carcinomas (p = 0.020). Medullary carcinomas (p = 0.017) and mucinous
carcinomas (p = 0.009) had a lower stromal expression of zeb1 than ductal
carcinomas. Stromal twist expression was also lower in mucinous (p = 0.017) than 
in ductal carcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of transcriptional factors zeb1 and twist mainly occur in
the stromal compartment of breast carcinomas, possibly representing two
populations of cells; EMT transformed neoplastic cells and stromal fibroblastic
cells undergoing activation of zeb1 and twist due to growth factors produced by
the tumor. However, epithelial expression of twist was associated with a poor
prognosis, hinting at its importance in the spread of breast carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3055233
PMID: 21324165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Prostate. 2011 Sep;71(12):1332-43. doi: 10.1002/pros.21350. Epub 2011 Feb 14.

TGF-ß1-induced EMT of non-transformed prostate hyperplasia cells is characterized
by early induction of SNAI2/Slug.

Slabáková E(1), Pernicová Z, Slavícková E, Staríchová A, Kozubík A, Soucek K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytokinetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Brno,
Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) underlying cancer cell
invasion and metastasis has been thoroughly studied in prostate cancer. Although 
EMT markers have been clinically observed in benign prostate hyperplasia,
molecular events underlying the onset and progression of EMT in benign prostate
cells have not been described.
METHODS: EMT in BPH-1 cells was induced by TGF-ß1 treatment and the kinetics of
expression of EMT markers, regulators, and selected miRNAs was assessed by
western blotting and quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: EMT in BPH-1 cells was accompanied by rapid up-regulation of SNAI2/Slug 
and ZEB1 transcription factors, while changes in expression levels of ZEB2 and
miR-200 family members were observed after extended time intervals. Invasive
phenotype with EMT hallmarks, characterizing tumorigenic clones derived from
BPH-1 cells, was associated with increased mRNA levels of SNAI2, ZEB1, and ZEB2, 
but was not associated with significant changes in basal levels of miR-200 family
members. RNA interference revealed that SNAI2/Slug is crucial for TGF-ß1-induced 
vimentin up-regulation and migration of BPH-1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that in BPH-1 cells the transcription factor
SNAI2/Slug is important for EMT initiation, while the ZEB family of transcription
factors in cooperation with the miR-200 family may oppose the reversal of the EMT
phenotype.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21321977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12024-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.168625. Epub 2011
Feb 12.

Functional cooperation between Snail1 and twist in the regulation of ZEB1
expression during epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Dave N(1), Guaita-Esteruelas S, Gutarra S, Frias À, Beltran M, Peiró S, de
Herreros AG.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Recerca en Càncer, IMIM-Hospital del Mar, and Department de
Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, 
Spain.

Snail1 and Zeb1 are E-cadherin-transcriptional repressors induced during
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). In this article we have analyzed the
factors controlling Zeb1 expression during EMT. In NMuMG cells treated with
TGF-ß, Snail1 RNA and protein are induced 1 h after addition of the cytokine
preceding Zeb1 up-regulation that requires 6-8 h. Zeb1 gene expression is caused 
by increased RNA levels but also by enhanced protein stability and is markedly
dependent on Snail1 because depletion of this protein prevents Zeb1 protein and
RNA up-regulation. In addition to Snail1, depletion of the Twist transcriptional 
factor retards Zeb1 stimulation by TGF-ß or decreases Zeb1 expression in other
cellular models indicating that this factor is also required for Zeb1 expression.
Accordingly, Snail1 and Twist cooperate in the induction of Zeb1: co-transfection
of both cDNAs is required for the maximal expression of ZEB1 mRNA. Unexpectedly, 
the expression of Snail1 and Twist shows a mutual dependence although to a
different extent; whereas Twist depletion retards Snail1 up-regulation by TGF-ß, 
Snail1 is necessary for the rapid increase in Twist protein and later
up-regulation of Twist1 mRNA induced by the cytokine. Besides this effect on
Twist, Snail1 also induces the nuclear translocation of Ets1, another factor
required for Zeb1 expression. Both Twist and Ets1 bind to the ZEB1 promoter
although to different elements: whereas Ets1 interacts with the proximal
promoter, Twist does it with a 700-bp sequence upstream of the transcription
start site. These results indicate that Snail1 controls Zeb1 expression at
multiple levels and acts cooperatively with Twist in the ZEB1 gene transcription 
induction.

PMCID: PMC3069405
PMID: 21317430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Hum Pathol. 2011 Aug;42(8):1125-31. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.11.004. Epub 2011
Feb 11.

Nuclear Snail1 and nuclear ZEB1 protein expression in invasive and intraductal
human breast carcinomas.

Geradts J(1), de Herreros AG, Su Z, Burchette J, Broadwater G, Bachelder RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Erratum in
    Hum Pathol. 2012 Oct;43(10):1787.

Snail1 and ZEB1 are transcriptional repressors that drive tumor initiation and
metastasis in animal models. Snail1 and ZEB1 are frequently coexpressed in tumor 
cell lines, suggesting that these factors may cooperate to promote tumor
progression. However, coexpression of these transcriptional repressors in primary
human cancer specimens has not been investigated. Previous studies assessed
expression in primary breast cancers of Snail1 messenger RNA, which does not
reflect Snail1 activity because Snail1 is subject to posttranslational
modifications that inhibit its nuclear localization/activity. In the current
study, using breast tumor cell lines of known Snail1 and ZEB1 expression status, 
we developed immunohistochemistry protocols for detecting nuclear Snail1 and
nuclear ZEB1 proteins. Using these protocols, we assessed nuclear Snail1 and
nuclear ZEB1 expressions in primary human breast cancers of varying subtypes (n =
78). Nuclear Snail1 and estrogen receptor a expressions were inversely associated
in primary breast cancers, and nuclear Snail1 was expressed in approximately 80% 
of triple-negative breast cancers (lacking estrogen receptor a, progesterone
receptor, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 overexpression). In
contrast, nuclear ZEB1 was expressed at a significantly lower frequency in these 
breast cancers. Notably, nuclear Snail1 protein was detected in 45% of ductal
carcinoma in situ specimens (n = 29), raising the important possibility that
nuclear Snail1 expression in early stage breast lesions may predict future
development of invasive breast cancer. Collectively, our studies demonstrate
frequent expression of nuclear Snail1, but not nuclear ZEB1, in invasive,
triple-negative breast cancers as well as in intraductal carcinomas.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3315281
PMID: 21315410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Pathol. 2011 Mar;223(4):482-95. doi: 10.1002/path.2826. Epub 2011 Jan 5.

MicroRNA-200c attenuates tumour growth and metastasis of presumptive head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma stem cells.

Lo WL(1), Yu CC, Chiou GY, Chen YW, Huang PI, Chien CS, Tseng LM, Chu PY, Lu KH, 
Chang KW, Kao SY, Chiou SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry and Institute of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

MicroRNA-200c (miR200c) is emerging as an important regulator of tumourigenicity 
and cancer metastasis with a strong capacity for inducing epithelial-mesenchymal 
transitions. However, the role of miR200c in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) and HNSCC-associated cancer stem cells (HNSCC-CSCs) is unknown.
In this study, the expression of miR200c in the regional metastatic lymph node of
HNSCC tissues was significantly decreased, but BMI1 expression was increased as
compared to parental tumours. Importantly, site-directed mutagenesis with a
luciferase reporter assay showed that miR200c targeted the 3' UTR of BMI1 in
HNSCC cells. Isolated HNSCC-derived ALDH1(+) /CD44(+) cells displayed CSC-like
tumour initiating and radio-resistant properties. The expression levels of
miR200c were significantly down-regulated while BMI1 was increased in
HNSCC-ALDH1(+) /CD44(+) compared to the other subsets of HNSCC cells.
Furthermore, increased miR200c expression or knockdown of BMI1 could
significantly inhibit the malignant CSC-like properties of ALDH1(+) /CD44(+)
cells. miR200c over-expression further down-regulated the expressions of ZEB1,
Snail and N-cadherin, but up-regulated E-cadherin expression in ALDH1(+) /CD44(+)
cells. Finally, a xenotransplantion study confirmed that over-expression of
miR200c or BMI1 knockdown effectively inhibited the lung metastatic ability and
prolonged the survival rate of ALDH1(+) /CD44(+) -transplanted mice. In summary, 
miR200c negatively modulates the expression of BMI1 but also significantly
inhibits the metastatic capability of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in
malignant HNSCC by reducing the expression of BMI1/ZEB1. Restoration of miR200c
in HNSCC and CSCs may be a promising therapeutic approach.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21294122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Toxicol Sci. 2011 May;121(1):110-22. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr029. Epub 2011 Feb 2.

Reversal and prevention of arsenic-induced human bronchial epithelial cell
malignant transformation by microRNA-200b.

Wang Z(1), Zhao Y, Smith E, Goodall GJ, Drew PA, Brabletz T, Yang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
48824, USA.

Comment in
    Toxicol Sci. 2011 Aug;122(2):606; author reply 607-9.

Arsenic is a well-recognized human carcinogen, yet the mechanism by which it
causes human cancer has not been elucidated. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a big family 
of small noncoding RNAs and negatively regulate the expression of a large number 
of protein-coding genes. We investigated the role of miRNAs in arsenic-induced
human bronchial epithelial cell malignant transformation and tumor formation. We 
found that prolonged exposure of immortalized p53-knocked down human bronchial
epithelial cells (p53(low)HBECs) to low levels of arsenite (NaAsO2, 2.5 µM)
caused malignant transformation that was accompanied by epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and reduction in the levels of miR-200 family members. Stably
reexpressing miR-200b in arsenite-transformed cells (As-p53(low)HBECs) completely
reversed their transformed phenotypes, as evidenced by inhibition of colony
formation in soft agar and prevention of xenograft tumor formation in nude mice. 
Moreover, stably expressing miR-200b alone in parental nontransformed
p53(low)HBECs was sufficient to completely prevent arsenite exposure from
inducing EMT and malignant transformation. Further mechanistic studies showed
that depletion of miR-200 in arsenite-transformed cells involved induction of the
EMT-inducing transcription factors zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox factor 1
(ZEB1) and ZEB2 and increased methylation of miR-200 promoters. Stably expressing
ZEB1 alone in parental nontransformed p53(low)HBECs was sufficient to deplete
miR-200, induce EMT and cause cell transformation, phenocopying the oncogenic
effect of 16-week arsenite exposure. These findings establish for the first time 
a causal role for depletion of miR-200b expression in human cell malignant
transformation and tumor formation resulting from arsenic exposure.

PMCID: PMC3080188
PMID: 21292642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 15;71(6):2328-38. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2738. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

DCAMKL-1 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human pancreatic cells
through a miR-200a-dependent mechanism.

Sureban SM(1), May R, Lightfoot SA, Hoskins AB, Lerner M, Brackett DJ, Postier
RG, Ramanujam R, Mohammed A, Rao CV, Wyche JH, Anant S, Houchen CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Pancreatic cancer is an exceptionally aggressive disease in great need of more
effective therapeutic options. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a
key role in cancer invasion and metastasis, and there is a gain of stem cell
properties during EMT. Here we report increased expression of the putative
pancreatic stem cell marker DCAMKL-1 in an established KRAS transgenic mouse
model of pancreatic cancer and in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Colocalization
of DCAMKL-1 with vimentin, a marker of mesenchymal lineage, along with 14-3-3 s
was observed within premalignant PanIN lesions that arise in the mouse model.
siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCAMKL-1 in human pancreatic cancer cells induced
microRNA miR-200a, an EMT inhibitor, along with downregulation of EMT-associated 
transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail, Slug, and Twist. Furthermore, DCAMKL-1
knockdown resulted in downregulation of c-Myc and KRAS through a let-7a
microRNA-dependent mechanism, and downregulation of Notch-1 through a miR-144
microRNA-dependent mechanism. These findings illustrate direct regulatory links
between DCAMKL-1, microRNAs, and EMT in pancreatic cancer. Moreover, they
demonstrate a functional role for DCAMKL-1 in pancreatic cancer. Together, our
results rationalize DCAMKL-1 as a therapeutic target for eradicating pancreatic
cancers.

© 2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3072762
PMID: 21285251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Gynecol Oncol. 2011 Apr;121(1):200-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.12.339. Epub 2011
Jan 28.

Overexpression of miR-429 induces mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in
metastatic ovarian cancer cells.

Chen J(1), Wang L, Matyunina LV, Hill CG, McDonald JF.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Cancer Research Center, School of Biology and Parker H. Petit
Institute of Bioengineering and Biosciences, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332-0363, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal of all gynecological
malignancies primarily due to the sloughing-off of highly metastatic cells from
primary tumors and their subsequent spread throughout the peritoneal cavity.
Since the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of OC cells located at the
periphery of primary tumors is essential to this process, molecular interventions
that can block EMT are of potential clinical significance. Members of the miR200 
family of microRNAs have been implicated in EMT in other cancers. Our purpose was
to determine if miR200 family microRNAs may be involved in EMT in OC and of
potential therapeutic value in reducing OC metastasis.
METHODS: Gene expression profiles of two OC cell lines with different metastatic 
potentials were monitored using qRT-PCR (quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction). The effect of over-expression of a miR-200 family
microRNA (miR-429) in metastatic OC cells was monitored on molecular (qRT-PCR and
microarray) and functional (morphology, migration, invasiveness and anchorage
independence assays) levels.
RESULTS: Molecular profiling of two OC cell lines with differing metastatic
potentials identified significant differences in previously established
epithelial and mesenchymal cell biomarkers including E-cadherin, ZEB1, ZEB2,
miR-205 and miR-200 family microRNAs. Ectopic overexpression of miR-429, a member
of the miR-200 family of microRNAs, in mesenchymal-like OC cells resulted in
reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype (mesenchymal-epithelial transition, MET).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that miR-429 may not only be a useful biomarker
of EMT in ovarian cancer, but also of potential therapeutic value in abating OC
metastasis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21277012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 13;6(1):e16068. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016068.

Up-regulation of sonic hedgehog contributes to TGF-ß1-induced epithelial to
mesenchymal transition in NSCLC cells.

Maitah MY(1), Ali S, Ahmad A, Gadgeel S, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer, especially non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the
major cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. The aggressiveness of 
NSCLC has been shown to be associated with the acquisition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The acquisition of EMT phenotype
induced by TGF-ß1in several cancer cells has been implicated in tumor
aggressiveness and resistance to conventional therapeutics; however, the
molecular mechanism of EMT and tumor aggressiveness in NSCLC remains unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study we found for the first time that
the induction of EMT by chronic exposure of A549 NSCLC cells to TGF-ß1 (A549-M
cells) led to the up-regulation of sonic hedgehog (Shh) both at the mRNA and
protein levels causing activation of hedgehog signaling. These results were also 
reproduced in another NSCLC cell line (H2030). Induction of EMT was found to be
consistent with aggressive characteristics such as increased clonogenic growth,
cell motility and invasion. The aggressiveness of these cells was attenuated by
the treatment of A549-M cells with pharmacological inhibitors of Hh signaling in 
addition to Shh knock-down by siRNA. The inhibition of Hh signaling by
pharmacological inhibitors led to the reversal of EMT phenotype as confirmed by
the reduction of mesenchymal markers such as ZEB1 and Fibronectin, and induction 
of epithelial marker E-cadherin. In addition, knock-down of Shh by siRNA
significantly attenuated EMT induction by TGF-ß1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results show for the first time the transcriptional
up-regulation of Shh by TGF-ß1, which is mechanistically associated with TGF-ß1
induced EMT phenotype and aggressive behavior of NSCLC cells. Thus the inhibitors
of Shh signaling could be useful for the reversal of EMT phenotype, which would
inhibit the metastatic potential of NSCLC cells and also make these tumors more
sensitive to conventional therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3020967
PMID: 21249152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Mar;1809(3):200-10. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.01.003.
Epub 2011 Jan 15.

dEF1 promotes osteolytic metastasis of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells by
regulating MMP-1 expression.

Hu F(1), Wang C, Guo S, Sun W, Mi D, Gao Y, Zhang J, Zhu T, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Nankai University, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin, China.
ihufen@126.com

Breast cancer metastasis is supposed to involve several stages in which
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is regarded as the mechanistic basis for 
the behavior of cancer cells. Our recent studies have implicated that dEF1, a
member of the zinc finger-homeodomain transcription factor family, is required
for governing both breast cancer EMT and bone remodeling, highlighting a
potential role of dEF1 in modulating bone metastasis of breast cancer. In the
present study, we further demonstrated that conditioned medium derived from
dEF1-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells significantly induces osteoclast maturation 
and concurrently represses osteoblast differentiation and mineralization. On the 
contrary, conditioned medium derived from dEF1-interfered MDA-MB-231 cells
exhibits an opposite effect, thus confirming the effect of dEF to mediate
osteolytic metastasis of breast cancer. Furthermore, we found that, during this
process, dEF1 remarkably up-regulates matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1)
expression at both mRNA and protein levels in MDA-MB-231 cells. Importantly, the 
results of luciferase and CHIP assays indicated that dEF1 activates MMP-1
promoter activity through the AP-1 response element. Overexpression of dEF1 in
MDA-MB-231 cells significantly increases the recruitment of the AP-1 components, 
c-Jun/c-Fos, to the endogenous MMP-1 promoter, which in effect could be mediated 
via the MAPK signaling pathway. In conclusion, these observations suggest a
potent role of dEF1 to promote breast cancer metastasis to bone by regulating
secretion of growth factors in the tumor microenvironment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21241837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. BMC Med Genomics. 2011 Jan 17;4:8. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-8.

Systems biology of interstitial lung diseases: integration of mRNA and microRNA
expression changes.

Cho JH(1), Gelinas R, Wang K, Etheridge A, Piper MG, Batte K, Dakhallah D, Price 
J, Bornman D, Zhang S, Marsh C, Galas D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The molecular pathways involved in the interstitial lung diseases
(ILDs) are poorly understood. Systems biology approaches, with global expression 
data sets, were used to identify perturbed gene networks, to gain some
understanding of the underlying mechanisms, and to develop specific hypotheses
relevant to these chronic lung diseases.
METHODS: Lung tissue samples from patients with different types of ILD were
obtained from the Lung Tissue Research Consortium and total cell RNA was
isolated. Global mRNA and microRNA were profiled by hybridization and
amplification-based methods. Differentially expressed genes were compiled and
used to identify critical signaling pathways and potential biomarkers. Modules of
genes were identified that formed a regulatory network, and studies were
performed on cultured cells in vitro for comparison with the in vivo results.
RESULTS: By profiling mRNA and microRNA (miRNA) expression levels, we found
subsets of differentially expressed genes that distinguished patients with ILDs
from controls and that correlated with different disease stages and subtypes of
ILDs. Network analysis, based on pathway databases, revealed several
disease-associated gene modules, involving genes from the TGF-ß, Wnt, focal
adhesion, and smooth muscle actin pathways that are implicated in advancing
fibrosis, a critical pathological process in ILDs. A more comprehensive approach 
was also adapted to construct a putative global gene regulatory network based on 
the perturbation of key regulatory elements, transcription factors and microRNAs.
Our data underscores the importance of TGF-ß signaling and the persistence of
smooth muscle actin-containing fibroblasts in these diseases. We present evidence
that, downstream of TGF-ß signaling, microRNAs of the miR-23a cluster and the
transcription factor Zeb1 could have roles in mediating an epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the resultant persistence of mesenchymal cells
in these diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a comprehensive overview of the molecular networks
perturbed in ILDs, discuss several potential key molecular regulatory circuits,
and identify microRNA species that may play central roles in facilitating the
progression of ILDs. These findings advance our understanding of these diseases
at the molecular level, provide new molecular signatures in defining the specific
characteristics of the diseases, suggest new hypotheses, and reveal new potential
targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3035594
PMID: 21241464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 16;30(4):783-95. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.351. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

TGF-ß regulates isoform switching of FGF receptors and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition.

Shirakihara T(1), Horiguchi K, Miyazawa K, Ehata S, Shibata T, Morita I, Miyazono
K, Saitoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial event in wound healing, 
tissue repair, and cancer progression in adult tissues. Here, we demonstrate that
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß induced EMT and that long-term exposure to
TGF-ß elicited the epithelial-myofibroblastic transition (EMyoT) by inactivating 
the MEK-Erk pathway. During the EMT process, TGF-ß induced isoform switching of
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors, causing the cells to become sensitive
to FGF-2. Addition of FGF-2 to TGF-ß-treated cells perturbed EMyoT by
reactivating the MEK-Erk pathway and subsequently enhanced EMT through the
formation of MEK-Erk-dependent complexes of the transcription factor dEF1/ZEB1
with the transcriptional corepressor CtBP1. Consequently, normal epithelial cells
that have undergone EMT as a result of combined TGF-ß and FGF-2 stimulation
promoted the invasion of cancer cells. Thus, TGF-ß and FGF-2 may cooperate with
each other and may regulate EMT of various kinds of cells in cancer
microenvironment during cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3041949
PMID: 21224849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 16;30(4):770-82. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.349. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

The ZEB1/miR-200 feedback loop controls Notch signalling in cancer cells.

Brabletz S(1), Bajdak K, Meidhof S, Burk U, Niedermann G, Firat E, Wellner U,
Dimmler A, Faller G, Schubert J, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Notch signalling is important for development and tissue homeostasis and
activated in many human cancers. Nevertheless, mutations in Notch pathway
components are rare in solid tumours. ZEB1 is an activator of an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and has crucial roles in tumour
progression towards metastasis. ZEB1 and miR-200 family members repress
expression of each other in a reciprocal feedback loop. Since miR-200 members
target stem cell factors, ZEB1 indirectly induces stemness maintenance and
associated drug resistance. Here, we link ZEB1 and its cancer promoting
properties to Notch activation. We show that miR-200 members target Notch pathway
components, such as Jagged1 (Jag1) and the mastermind-like coactivators Maml2 and
Maml3, thereby mediating enhanced Notch activation by ZEB1. We further detected a
coordinated upregulation of Jag1 and ZEB1, associated with reduced miR-200
expression in two aggressive types of human cancer, pancreatic adenocarcinoma and
basal type of breast cancer. These findings explain increased Notch signalling in
some types of cancers, where mutations in Notch pathway genes are rare. Moreover,
they indicate an additional way how ZEB1 exerts its tumour progressing functions.

PMCID: PMC3041948
PMID: 21224848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 16;30(4):756-69. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.358. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

Targeting Notch signalling by the conserved miR-8/200 microRNA family in
development and cancer cells.

Vallejo DM(1), Caparros E, Dominguez M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(CSIC) and Universidad Miguel Hernández (UMH), Campus de Sant Joan, Sant Joan,
Alicante, Spain.

Notch signalling is crucial for the correct development and growth of numerous
organs and tissues, and when subverted it can cause cancer. Loss of miR-8/200
microRNAs (miRNAs) is commonly observed in advanced tumours and correlates with
their invasion and acquisition of stem-like properties. Here, we show that this
miRNA family controls Notch signalling activation in Drosophila and human cells. 
In an overexpression screen, we identified the Drosophila miR-8 as a potent
inhibitor of Notch-induced overgrowth and tumour metastasis. Gain and loss of
mir-8 provoked developmental defects reminiscent of impaired Notch signalling and
we demonstrated that miR-8 directly inhibits Notch ligand Serrate. Likewise,
miR-200c and miR-141 directly inhibited JAGGED1, impeding proliferation of human 
metastatic prostate cancer cells. It has been suggested that JAGGED1 may also be 
important for metastases. Although in metastatic cancer cells, JAGGED1 modestly
regulated ZEB1, the miR-200c's target in invasion, studies in Drosophila revealed
that only concurrent overexpression of Notch and Zfh1/ZEB1 induced tumour
metastases. Together, these data define a new way to attenuate or boost Notch
signalling that may have clinical interest.

PMCID: PMC3041954
PMID: 21224847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Pathol. 2011 Jan;178(1):373-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.028. Epub 2010
Dec 23.

Laminin-332-rich tumor microenvironment for tumor invasion in the interface zone 
of breast cancer.

Kim BG(1), An HJ, Kang S, Choi YP, Gao MQ, Park H, Cho NH.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Dense fibrosis, which is caused by desmoplastic reaction, is usually found in
invasive ductal carcinoma and may represent the alteration of the tumor
microenvironment preceding tumor invasion. Thus, the dense fibrotic zone around
invasive ductal carcinoma can be considered to be the actual tissue site of tumor
microenvironment, where the precedent alterations for tumor invasion occur. To
characterize the dense fibrotic zone, we classified invasive ductal carcinoma
tissue into a tumor zone, a normal zone, and the novel interface zone (IZ), which
shows dense fibrosis. The postulated IZ is a 5-mm-wide belt that circles the
tumor margin and overlaps with normal tissue. Of the extracellular matrix
components, laminin-332 was specifically overexpressed in the IZ. Events that
appear to be similar to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a novel source of 
myofibroblast formation from epithelial cells, were observed in the IZ, according
to the following characteristics: overexpression of matrix metalloproteinase 3,
membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase, snail, and zinc finger E-box-binding
homeobox 1, and the gain of N-cadherin expression, as well as the down-regulation
of miR200c. The myofibroblasts isolated from the IZ, which were designated
interface zone-fibroblast, displayed laminin-332 and membrane type 1-matrix
metalloproteinase overexpression, in contrast with both cancer-associated
fibroblasts and normal breast fibroblasts. Taken together, our results suggest
that the IZ, which shows dense fibrosis, may provide a specialized
microenvironment for guiding tumor invasion: the fibrosis caused by laminin-332
overexpressing myofibroblast formation (interface zone-fibroblast) via
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3069863
PMID: 21224074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;71(1):245-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2330.

Snail2 is an essential mediator of Twist1-induced epithelial mesenchymal
transition and metastasis.

Casas E(1), Kim J, Bendesky A, Ohno-Machado L, Wolfe CJ, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0636, USA.

To metastasize, carcinoma cells must attenuate cell-cell adhesion to disseminate 
into distant organs. A group of transcription factors, including Twist1, Snail1, 
Snail2, ZEB1, and ZEB2, have been shown to induce epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT), thus promoting tumor dissemination. However, it is unknown
whether these transcription factors function independently or coordinately to
activate the EMT program. Here we report that direct induction of Snail2 is
essential for Twist1 to induce EMT. Snail2 knockdown completely blocks the
ability of Twist1 to suppress E-cadherin transcription. Twist1 binds to an
evolutionarily conserved E-box on the proximate Snail2 promoter to induce its
transcription. Snail2 induction is essential for Twist1-induced cell invasion and
distant metastasis in mice. In human breast tumors, the expression of Twist1 and 
Snail2 is highly correlated. Together, our results show that Twist1 needs to
induce Snail2 to suppress the epithelial branch of the EMT program and that
Twist1 and Snail2 act together to promote EMT and tumor metastasis.

© 2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3025803
PMID: 21199805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2011 Jan 1;3:515-28.

Sulforaphane synergizes with quercetin to inhibit self-renewal capacity of
pancreatic cancer stem cells.

Srivastava RK(1), Tang SN, Zhu W, Meeker D, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. rsrivastava@kumc.edu

According to the cancer stem cell hypothesis, the aggressive growth and early
metastasis of cancer may arise through dysregulation of self-renewal of stem
cells. The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by
which sulforaphane (SFN, an active compound in cruciferous vegetables) inhibits
self-renewal capacity of pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs), and synergizes with
quercetin, a major polyphenol and flavonoid commonly detected in many fruits and 
vegetables. Our data demonstrated that SFN inhibited self-renewal capacity of
pancreatic CSCs. Inhibition of Nanog by lentiviral-mediated shRNA expression
enhanced the inhibitory effects of sulforaphane on self-renewal capacity of CSCs.
SFN induced apoptosis by inhibiting the expression of Bcl-2 and XIAP,
phosphorylation of FKHR, and activating caspase-3. Moreover, SFN inhibited
expression of proteins involved in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(beta-catenin, vimentin, twist-1, and ZEB1), suggesting the blockade of signaling
involved in early metastasis. Furthermore, the combination of quercetin with SFN 
had synergistic effects on self-renewal capacity of pancreatic CSCs. These data
suggest that SFN either alone or in combination with quercetin can eliminate
cancer stem cell-characteristics.

PMCID: PMC4080794
PMID: 21196331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2011 Feb;28(2):137-55. doi: 10.1007/s10585-010-9367-3. Epub 
2010 Dec 31.

A systems view of epithelial-mesenchymal transition signaling states.

Thomson S(1), Petti F, Sujka-Kwok I, Mercado P, Bean J, Monaghan M, Seymour SL,
Argast GM, Epstein DM, Haley JD.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research, OSI Pharmaceuticals Inc, 1 Bioscience Park Drive,
Farmingdale, NY 11735, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important contributor to the
invasion and metastasis of epithelial-derived cancers. While considerable effort 
has focused in the regulators involved in the transition process, we have focused
on consequences of EMT to prosurvival signaling. Changes in distinct metastable
and 'epigentically-fixed' EMT states were measured by correlation of protein,
phosphoprotein, phosphopeptide and RNA transcript abundance. The assembly of 1167
modulated components into functional systems or machines simplified biological
understanding and increased prediction confidence highlighting four functional
groups: cell adhesion and migration, metabolism, transcription nodes and
proliferation/survival networks. A coordinate metabolic reduction in a cluster of
17 free-radical stress pathway components was observed and correlated with
reduced glycolytic and increased oxidative phosphorylation enzyme capacity,
consistent with reduced cell cycling and reduced need for macromolecular
biosynthesis in the mesenchymal state. An attenuation of EGFR autophosphorylation
and a switch from autocrine to paracrine-competent EGFR signaling was implicated 
in the enablement of tumor cell chemotaxis. A similar attenuation of IGF1R, MET
and RON signaling with EMT was observed. In contrast, EMT increased prosurvival
autocrine IL11/IL6-JAK2-STAT signaling, autocrine fibronectin-integrin a5ß1
activation, autocrine Axl/Tyro3/PDGFR/FGFR RTK signaling and autocrine TGFßR
signaling. A relatively uniform loss of polarity and cell-cell junction linkages 
to actin cytoskeleton and intermediate filaments was measured at a systems level.
A more heterogeneous gain of ECM remodeling and associated with invasion and
migration was observed. Correlation to stem cell, EMT, invasion and metastasis
datasets revealed the greatest similarity with normal and cancerous breast stem
cell populations, CD49f(hi)/EpCAM(-/lo) and CD44(hi)/CD24(lo), respectively.

PMCID: PMC3040305
PMID: 21194007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 30;5(11):e15519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015519.

Characterization of the small RNA transcriptomes of androgen dependent and
independent prostate cancer cell line by deep sequencing.

Xu G(1), Wu J, Zhou L, Chen B, Sun Z, Zhao F, Tao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Laboratory Diagnosis, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou, China.

Given the important roles of miRNA in post-transcriptional regulation and its
implications for cancer, characterization of miRNA facilitates us to uncover
molecular mechanisms underlying the progression of androgen-independent prostate 
cancer (PCa). The emergence of next-generation sequencing technologies has
dramatically changed the speed of all aspects of sequencing in a rapid and
cost-effective fashion, which can permit an unbiased, quantitive and in-depth
investigation of small RNA transcriptome. In this study, we used high-throughput 
Illumina sequencing to comprehensively represent the full complement of
individual small RNA and to characterize miRNA expression profiles in both the
androgen dependent and independent Pca cell line. At least 83 miRNAs are
significantly differentially expressed, of which 41 are up-regulated and 42 are
down-regulated, indicating these miRNAs may be involved in the transition of
LNCaP to an androgen-independent phenotype. In addition, we have identified 43
novel miRNAs from the androgen dependent and independent PCa library and 3 of
them are specific to the androgen-independent PCa. Function annotation of target 
genes indicated that most of these differentially expressed miRNAs tend to target
genes involved in signal transduction and cell communication, epically the MAPK
signaling pathway. The small RNA transcriptomes obtained in this study provide
considerable insights into a better understanding of the expression and function 
of small RNAs in the development of androgen-independent prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2994876
PMID: 21152091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Am J Transl Res. 2010 Oct 23;3(1):90-9.

Molecular signature of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human prostate 
cancer bone metastasis.

Sethi S, Macoska J, Chen W, Sarkar FH.

Prostate cancer (PCa) has a predilection to metastasize to bone. Before
metastasis can occur there is transition of the sessile epithelial cancer cells
to become motile and invasive mesenchymal phenotypes by an important albeit
transient process called Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). The cascade 
of molecular events triggered by this process is clinically relevant as they are 
associated with cancer stem-like cells (CSC), decreased senescence and eventual
drug resistance phenotype. We interrogated some EMT markers that have been
implicated in primary and bone metastasis of PCa using archived patient samples. 
Using an immunohistochemical approach, E-cadherin, Vimentin, ZEB1, Notch-1,
PDGF-D and NF-<U+03BA>B were analyzed. Cases were microscopically scored using intensity
(0, +1, +2, +3) and percentage of positive cells. Data was statistically analyzed
using Fisher's Exact Test. Aberrant expression of EMT markers E-cadherin,
Vimentin, PDGF-D, NF-<U+03BA>B, Notch-1 and ZEB1 was observed in PCa (primary tumor
specimen) and bone metastasis tissues. The aberrant expression pattern varied
according to the location within the tumor with higher expression was observed
more at the invasive tumor front (ITF) vs. the center of the tumor. Notch-1 was
significantly over-expressed in bone metastasis compared to primary PCa
(p=0.057). The expression levels, intensity and % of positive cells of the
remaining markers were not statistically significant in PCa vs. bone metastasis. 
In conclusion, protein expression analysis revealed the existence of EMT
phenotype in the PCa and bone metastasis. Variation in the aberrant expression
patterns at the invasive tumor front indicates the role of EMT markers in tumor
invasion. Our results suggest that Notch-1 could play a role in PCa bone
metastasis. Studies in larger patient cohorts are warranted before these EMT
molecular markers can be translated to the clinical use.

PMCID: PMC2981429
PMID: 21139809  [PubMed]


337. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Feb;64(2):136-40. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.086678. Epub 2010 Dec
2.

Zeb1 and twist are more commonly expressed in metastatic than primary lung
tumours and show inverse associations with claudins.

Merikallio H(1), Kaarteenaho R, Pääkkö P, Lehtonen S, Hirvikoski P, Mäkitaro R,
Harju T, Soini Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Respiratory Research Unit, Clinical Research 
Center, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Zeb1 and twist regulate expression of genes which take part in
epitheliomesenchymal transition (EMT). Claudins are tight junctional proteins
regulating polarity and paracellular permeability of epithelial cells.
AIMS AND METHODS: To study Zeb1 and twist in 289 primary and 54 metastatic lung
tumours and their relation to expression of claudins 1-5 and 7 by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Metastatic tumours showed a significantly lower expression of zeb1 and
twist (33.0% and 38.0% vs 5.0% and 14.5%, p<0.001 for both) and they also had a
significantly lower expression of claudin 1 (p<0.001), claudin 4 (p<0.001),
claudin 5 (p=0.001) and claudin 7 (p<0.001) than did primary tumours. Primary
lung tumours showed a strong inverse association between zeb1 and claudin 1
(p=0.024) and claudin 2 (p=0.003). For twist an inverse association was found
with claudin 5 (p=0.007). In metastatic tumours zeb1 was inversely associated
with claudin 7 (p=0.050) and twist with claudin 5 (p=0.025). Overexpression of
claudin 5 was associated with decreased survival (p=0.017). For zeb1 or twist, no
association with survival was observed in primary or metastatic tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: According to protein expression, involvement of zeb1 and twist in
EMT in primary lung tumours is relatively infrequent. Carcinomas metastatic to
the lung showed a significantly higher expression of these transcriptional
factors than primary lung tumours, indicating their probable importance in the
metastatic process. Zeb1 and twist were inversely associated with several
claudins, indicating a role in their down-regulation.

PMID: 21131312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Pathol. 2011 Jan;223(1):72-80. doi: 10.1002/path.2802. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Micro-RNA signature of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in endometrial
carcinosarcoma.

Castilla MÁ(1), Moreno-Bueno G, Romero-Pérez L, Van De Vijver K, Biscuola M,
López-García MÁ, Prat J, Matías-Guiu X, Cano A, Oliva E, Palacios J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío-IBIS,
Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.

Endometrial carcinosarcomas (ECSs) undergo a true epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The molecular determinants of the EMT in vivo are unclear,
although a role for some miRNAs, mainly involving the miR-200 family, was
recently suggested from in vitro cellular models. We analysed the microRNA
(miRNA) signatures associated to EMT in human carcinosarcomas, and determined
their relationships with EMT markers and repressors of E-cadherin transcription. 
The expression of E-, P- and N-cadherin, cadherin-11, p120, vimentin, SPARC,
fascin and caveolin-1 was studied in a group of 76 ECS by immunohistochemistry.
In addition, real-time PCR was used to measure the differences in the expression 
of 384 miRNAs, E-cadherin, cadherin-11, SPARC, SNAIL, ZEB1, ZEB2, TWIST-1, TCF4, 
TGFß1 and TGFß2 between the epithelial and mesenchymal components of 23 ECSs. A
loss of epithelial characteristics, including cadherin switching and the
acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype, was accompanied by changes in the profile
of miRNA expression and the up-regulation of all the E-cadherin repressors
analysed. A greater than five-fold difference in the expression of 14 miRNAs
between both neoplastic components was seen. Members of the miR-200 family were
down-regulated in the mesenchymal part of the ECS. In addition, miR-23b and
miR-29c, which are involved in the inhibition of mesenchymal markers, and
miR-203, which is involved in the inhibition of cell stemness, were also
down-regulated. Up-regulated miRNAs included miR-155, miR-369-5p, miR-370,
miR-450a and miR-542-5p. These data suggest that in human ECS, the interplay
between transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin and miRNAs provides a link
between EMT-activation and the maintenance of stemness.

Copyright © 2010 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21125666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4461-8. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Metformin against TGFß-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT): from
cancer stem cells to aging-associated fibrosis.

Cufí S(1), Vazquez-Martin A, Oliveras-Ferraros C, Martin-Castillo B, Joven J,
Menendez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Girona.

Transforming Growth Factor-b (TGFb) is a major driving force of the
Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal (EMT) genetic program, which becomes overactive in the 
pathophysiology of many age-related human diseases.  TGFb-driven EMT is
sufficient to generate migrating cancer stem cells by directly linking the
acquisition of cellular motility with the maintenance of tumor-initiating
(stemness) capacity.  Chronic diseases exhibiting excessive fibrosis can be
caused by repeated and sustained infliction of TGFb-driven EMT, which increases
collagen and extracellular matrix synthesis.  Pharmacological prevention and/or
reversal of TGFb-induced EMT may therefore have important clinical applications
in the management of cancer metastasis as well as in the prevention and/or
treatment of end-state organ failures.  Earlier studies from our group have
revealed that clinically-relevant concentrations of the biguanide derivative
metformin, the most widely used oral agent to lower blood glucose concentration
in patients with type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome, notably decreased both
the self-renewal and the proliferation of trastuzumab-refractory breast cancer
stem cell populations.  Given that: a.) tumor-initiating cancer stem cells
display a significant enrichment in the expression of basal/mesenchymal or
myoepithelial markers, including an increased secretion of TGFb; b.) metformin
treatment impedes the ontogeny of generating the stem cell phenotype by
transcriptionally repressing key drivers of the EMT genetic program (e.g. ZEB1,
TWIST1, SNAIL2 [Slug], TGFbs), we recently hypothesized that prevention of
TGFb-induced EMT might represent a common molecular mechanism underlying the
anti-cancer stem cells and anti-fibrotic actions of metformin.  Remarkably,
metformin exposure not only impedes TGFb-promoted loss of the epithelial marker
E-cadherin in MCF-7 breast cancer cells but it prevents further TGF-induced cell 
scattering and accumulation of the mesenchymal marker vimentin in Madin-Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) cells.  We now propose that metformin, by weakening the
ability of TGFb signaling to fully induce mesenchymal cell states in a variety of
pathological processes including fibrosis (e.g. chronic renal disease,
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, heart failure or sclerosis) and malignant
progression (and likely by reducing TGFb-regulated inflammation and immune
responses -inflamm-aging-), molecularly behaves as a bona fide anti-aging
modality.

PMID: 21088486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 30;107(48):20828-33. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1008301107. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

miR-200 family and targets, ZEB1 and ZEB2, modulate uterine quiescence and
contractility during pregnancy and labor.

Renthal NE(1), Chen CC, Williams KC, Gerard RD, Prange-Kiel J, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, North Texas March of Dimes Birth Defects Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Throughout most of pregnancy, uterine quiescence is maintained by increased
progesterone receptor (PR) transcriptional activity, whereas spontaneous labor is
initiated/facilitated by a concerted series of biochemical events that activate
inflammatory pathways and have a negative impact on PR function. In this study,
we uncovered a previously undescribed regulatory pathway whereby micro-RNAs
(miRNAs) serve as hormonally modulated and conserved mediators of
contraction-associated genes in the pregnant uterus in the mouse and human. Using
miRNA and gene expression microarray analyses of uterine tissues, we identified a
conserved family of miRNAs, the miR-200 family, that is highly induced at term in
both mice and humans as well as two coordinately down-regulated targets, zinc
finger E-box binding homeobox proteins ZEB1 and ZEB2, which act as
transcriptional repressors. We also observed up-regulation of the miR-200 family 
and down-regulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 in two different mouse models of preterm
labor. We further demonstrated that ZEB1 is directly up-regulated by the action
of progesterone (P(4))/PR at the ZEB1 promoter. Excitingly, we observed that ZEB1
and ZEB2 inhibit expression of the contraction-associated genes, oxytocin
receptor and connexin-43, and block oxytocin-induced contractility in human
myometrial cells. Together, these findings implicate the miR-200 family and their
targets, ZEB1 and ZEB2, as unique P(4)/PR-mediated regulators of uterine
quiescence and contractility during pregnancy and labor and shed light on the
molecular mechanisms involved in preterm birth.

PMCID: PMC2996411
PMID: 21079000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Ophthalmic Genet. 2010 Dec;31(4):230-4. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2010.518577.

Variable ocular phenotypes of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy caused by 
mutations in the ZEB1 gene.

Liskova P(1), Filipec M, Merjava S, Jirsova K, Tuft SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of the Biology and Pathology of the Eye, Institute of Inherited
Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and 
General Teaching Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic. petra.liskova@lf1.cuni.cz

PURPOSE: To describe the ocular features of 6 Czech and British patients with
posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) caused by mutations in the zinc
finger E-box binding homeobox 1 gene (ZEB1).
METHODS: Case note review of 4 individuals with p.E776fs mutation, one with
p.Y719X and one with p.F375fs mutation within the ZEB1 gene.
RESULTS: Five individuals exhibited endothelial and Descemet membrane changes
consistent with the diagnosis of PPCD. We concluded that one 70-year-old female
who had a normal endothelium at both slit lamp and non-contact specular
microscopy was a case of non-penetrance. The onset of disease was as early as 3
months after birth. One patient had irregular astigmatism with inferior corneal
steepening on videokeratography, but without corneal thinning or other signs of
keratoconus. Two others had corneal steepening >49D but with regular astigmatism.
Three individuals underwent penetrating keratoplasty (PK) in 1 eye, with one
patient treated for secondary glaucoma prior to the PK.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype associated with changes in the ZEB1 gene exhibits
variable expression and incomplete penetrance and seems to have a low risk for
secondary glaucoma or the need for keratoplasty compared to PPCD linked to
20p11.2. There is insufficient data for phenotype correlations with PPCD caused
by other genes.

PMID: 21067486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Dec;9(12):3254-66. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0582. Epub
2010 Nov 1.

MS-275 sensitizes TRAIL-resistant breast cancer cells, inhibits angiogenesis and 
metastasis, and reverses epithelial-mesenchymal transition in vivo.

Srivastava RK(1), Kurzrock R, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) show promise for the treatment of cancers. The 
purpose of this study was to examine the molecular mechanisms by which HDAC
inhibitor MS-275 sensitizes TRAIL-resistant breast cancer cells in vivo, inhibits
angiogenesis and metastasis, and reverses epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). BALB/c nude mice were orthotopically implanted with TRAIL-resistant
invasive breast cancer MDA-MB-468 cells and treated intravenously with MS-275,
TRAIL, or MS-275 followed by TRAIL, 4 times during first 3 weeks. Treatment of
mice with TRAIL alone had no effect on tumor growth, metastasis, angiogenesis,
and EMT. In comparison, MS-275 sensitized TRAIL-resistant xenografts by inducing 
apoptosis, inhibiting tumor cell proliferation, angiogenesis, metastasis, and
reversing EMT. Treatment of nude mice with MS-275 resulted in downregulation of
NF-<U+03BA>B and its gene products (cyclin D1, Bcl-2, Bcl-X(L), VEGF, HIF-1a, IL-6,
IL-8, MMP-2, and MMP-9) and upregulation of DR4, DR5, Bax, Bak, and p21(/CIP1) in
tumor cells. Furthermore, MS-275-treated mice showed significantly reduced tumor 
growth and decreased circulating vascular VEGFR2-positive endothelial cells,
CD31-positive or von Willebrand factor-positive blood vessels, and lung
metastasis compared with control mice. Interestingly, MS-275 caused "cadherin
switch" and reversed EMT as shown by the upregulation of E-cadherin and
downregulation of N-cadherin and transcription factors Snail, Slug, and ZEB1. In 
conclusion, sequential treatments of mice with MS-275 followed by TRAIL may
target multiple pathways to reverse EMT and inhibit tumor progression,
angiogenesis, and metastasis and represent a novel therapeutic approach to treat 
cancer.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 21041383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cancer Lett. 2011 Jan 1;300(1):66-78. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.09.007. Epub
2010 Oct 25.

ZEB1-responsive genes in non-small cell lung cancer.

Gemmill RM(1), Roche J, Potiron VA, Nasarre P, Mitas M, Coldren CD, Helfrich BA, 
Garrett-Mayer E, Bunn PA, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine and the Hollings
Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental process
enabling epithelial cells to gain a migratory mesenchymal phenotype. In cancer,
this process contributes to metastases; however the regulatory signals and
mechanistic details are not fully elucidated. Here, we sought to identify the
subset of genes regulated in lung cancer by ZEB1, an E-box transcriptional
repressor known to induce EMT. Using an Affymetrix-based expression database of
38 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, we identified 324 genes that
correlated negatively with ZEB1 and 142 that were positively correlated. A
mesenchymal gene pattern (low E-cadherin, high Vimentin or N-cadherin) was
significantly associated with ZEB1 and ZEB2, but not with Snail, Slug, Twist1 or 
Twist2. Among eight genes selected for validation, seven were confirmed to
correlate with ZEB1 by quantitative real-time RT-PCR in a series of 22 NSCLC cell
lines, either negatively (CDS1, EpCAM, ESRP1, ESRP2, ST14) or positively (FGFR1, 
Vimentin). In addition, over-expression or knockdown of ZEB1 led to corresponding
changes in gene expression, demonstrating that these genes are also regulated by 
ZEB1, either directly or indirectly. Of note, the combined knockdown of ZEB1 and 
ZEB2 led to apparent synergistic responses in gene expression. Furthermore, these
responses were not restricted to artificial settings, since most genes were
similarly regulated during a physiologic induction of EMT by TGF-ß plus EGF.
Finally, the absence of ST14 (matriptase) was linked to ZEB1 positivity in lung
cancer tissue microarrays, implying that the regulation observed in vitro applies
to the human disease. In summary, this study identifies a new set of
ZEB-regulated genes in human lung cancer cells and supports the hypothesis that
ZEB1 and ZEB2 are key regulators of the EMT process in this disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3337721
PMID: 20980099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Aging (Albany NY). 2010 Oct;2(10):735-41.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and senescence: two cancer-related processes
are crossing paths.

Smit MA(1), Peeper DS.

Author information: 
(1)The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition is involved in several physiological
processes. However, it is also believed to contribute to cancer progression.
Conversely, cellular senescence constitutes a failsafe program against cancer
progression. Interestingly, EMT and senescence seem to cross paths, with several 
factors playing dominant roles in both settings. Here, we describe recent
observations that link these important cellular processes.

PMCID: PMC2993803
PMID: 20975209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Hum Pathol. 2011 Jan;42(1):103-10. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.05.019. Epub 2010 
Oct 20.

Repression of E-cadherin by SNAIL, ZEB1, and TWIST in invasive ductal carcinomas 
of the breast: a cooperative effort?

Montserrat N(1), Gallardo A, Escuin D, Catasus L, Prat J, Gutiérrez-Avignó FJ,
Peiró G, Barnadas A, Lerma E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Autonomous
University of Barcelona, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

It has been suggested that down-regulation of E-cadherin in invasive breast
ductal carcinomas is mediated by the aberrant expression of several of its
transcriptional repressors, but their inhibitory role and clinical importance are
not yet well established. We investigated gene and protein expression patterns of
the E-cadherin repressors SNAIL, ZEB1, and TWIST in relation to clinicopathologic
parameters, in a series of 88 patients with invasive breast ductal carcinomas.
Up-regulation of SNAIL messenger RNA (P = .008) and down-regulation of TWIST (P =
.022) were associated with triple-negative tumors, whereas ZEB1 gene expression
was more frequent in hormone-positive tumors (P = .004). Loss of E-cadherin was
found in 19% of the tumors, but it did not correlate with aberrant expression of 
any of the repressors investigated herein. Nonetheless, we found that ZEB-1
protein overexpression inversely correlated with high tumor grade (P = .018),
nuclear grade (P = .002), and presence of lymph nodes (P = .001), and these data 
were consistent with the gene expression data for ZEB1. Clinically,
down-regulation of ZEB1 messenger RNA was associated with poor overall survival
(P = .011) and disease-free survival (P = .053), whereas patients with TWIST
negative tumors had a worse overall survival (P = .008) and disease-free survival
(P = .006). Our data indicate that deregulation of TWIST is somehow important in 
the aggressiveness of triple-negative carcinomas and poor patient outcome,
whereas down-regulation of ZEB1 seems to play a role in tumor spread, metastases,
and poor survival.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20970163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 12;5(10):e13390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013390.

Tissue transglutaminase promotes drug resistance and invasion by inducing
mesenchymal transition in mammary epithelial cells.

Kumar A(1), Xu J, Brady S, Gao H, Yu D, Reuben J, Mehta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Recent observations that aberrant expression of tissue transglutaminase (TG2)
promotes growth, survival, and metastasis of multiple tumor types is of great
significance and could yield novel therapeutic targets for improved patient
outcomes. To accomplish this, a clear understanding of how TG2 contributes to
these phenotypes is essential. Using mammary epithelial cell lines (MCF10A,
MCF12A, MCF7 and MCF7/RT) as a model system, we determined the impact of TG2
expression on cell growth, cell survival, invasion, and differentiation. Our
results show that TG2 expression promotes drug resistance and invasive functions 
by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Thus, TG2 expression
supported anchorage-independent growth of mammary epithelial cells in soft-agar, 
disrupted the apical-basal polarity, and resulted in disorganized acini
structures when grown in 3D-culture. At molecular level, TG2 expression resulted 
in loss of E-cadherin and increased the expression of various transcriptional
repressors (Snail1, Zeb1, Zeb2 and Twist1). Tumor growth factor-beta (TGF-ß)
failed to induce EMT in cells lacking TG2 expression, suggesting that TG2 is a
downstream effector of TGF-ß-induced EMT. Moreover, TG2 expression induced stem
cell-like phenotype in mammary epithelial cells as revealed by enrichment of
CD44(+)/CD24(-/low) cell populations. Overall, our studies show that aberrant
expression of TG2 is sufficient for inducing EMT in epithelial cells and
establish a strong link between TG2 expression and progression of metastatic
breast disease.

PMCID: PMC2953521
PMID: 20967228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cell Cycle. 2010 Sep 15;9(18):3807-14. Epub 2010 Sep 25.

Metformin regulates breast cancer stem cell ontogeny by transcriptional
regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) status.

Vazquez-Martin A(1), Oliveras-Ferraros C, Cufí S, Del Barco S, Martin-Castillo B,
Menendez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Girona, Catalonia, Spain.

The sole overexpression of pivotal regulators of the embryonic
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) genetic program ("EMT status") may be
sufficient to efficiently drive the ontogeny of the breast cancer stem cell
molecular signature independently of changes in EMT functioning ("EMT
phenotype"). Using basal-like breast cancer models naturally enriched in either
CD44(pos)CD24(low/neg) or CD44(pos)CD24(pos) tumor-initiating cell populations we
herein illustrate that non-cytotoxic concentrations of the anti-diabetic drug
metformin efficiently impedes the ontogeny of generating the stem cell phenotype 
by transcriptionally repressing the stem cell property EMT. Metformin treatment
dynamically regulated the CD44(pos)CD24(neg/low) breast cancer stem cell
immunophenotype, transcriptionally reprogrammed cells through decreased
expression of key drivers of the EMT machinery including the transcription
factors ZEB1, TWIST1 and SNAI2 (Slug) and the pleiotrophic cytokines TGFßs, and
lastly impeded the propensity of breast cancer stem cells to form multicellular
"microtumors" in non-adherent and non-differentiating conditions (i.e.,
"mammospheres"). These findings, altogether, provide strong motivation for the
continued molecular understanding and clinical development of metformin as a
non-toxic therapeutic aimed to interdict the breast cancer stem cell phenotype by
targeting EMT, a molecular process that is central to the ontogenesis of the
breast cancer stem cell molecular signature.

PMID: 20890129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Exp Eye Res. 2012 Aug;101:105-6. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2010.09.010. Epub 2010 Sep
22.

Focus on molecules: Smad Interacting Protein 1 (Sip1, ZEB2, ZFHX1B).

Grabitz AL(1), Duncan MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716,
USA.

PMCID: PMC3016443
PMID: 20868684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 15;5(9):e12716. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012716.

Fine-mapping resolves Eae23 into two QTLs and implicates ZEB1 as a candidate gene
regulating experimental neuroinflammation in rat.

Stridh P(1), Thessen Hedreul M, Beyeen AD, Adzemovic MZ, Laaksonen H, Gillett A, 
Ockinger J, Marta M, Lassmann H, Becanovic K, Jagodic M, Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Neuroimmunology Unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
pernilla.strid@ki.se

BACKGROUND: To elucidate mechanisms involved in multiple sclerosis (MS), we
studied genetic regulation of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in 
rats, assuming a conservation of pathogenic pathways. In this study, we focused
on Eae23, originally identified to regulate EAE in a (LEW.1AV1xPVG.1AV1)F2 cross.
Our aim was to determine whether one or more genes within the 67 Mb region
regulate EAE and to define candidate risk genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used high resolution quantitative trait loci
(QTL) analysis in the 10th generation (G10) of an advanced intercross line (AIL) 
to resolve Eae23 into two QTLs that independently regulate EAE, namely Eae23a and
Eae23b. We established a congenic strain to validate the effect of this region on
disease. PVG alleles in Eae23 resulted in significant protection from EAE and
attenuated CNS inflammation/demyelination. Disease amelioration was accompanied
with increased levels of Foxp3(+) cells in the CNS of the congenic strain
compared to DA. We then focused on candidate gene investigation in Eae23b, a 9 Mb
region linked to all clinical phenotypes. Affymetrix exon arrays were used to
study expression of the genes in Eae23b in the parental strains, where none
showed differential expression. However, we found lower expression of exon 4 of
ZEB1, which is specific for splice-variant Zfhep1. ZEB1 is an interleukin 2 (IL2)
repressor involved in T cell development. The splice-specific variance prompted
us to next analyze the expression of ZEB1 and its two splice variants, Zfhep1 and
Zfhep2, in both lymph node and spleen. We demonstrated that ZEB1 splice-variants 
are differentially expressed; severity of EAE and higher IL2 levels were
associated with down-regulation of Zfhep1 and up-regulation of Zfhep2.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We speculate that the balance between splice-variants
of ZEB1 could influence the regulation of EAE. Further functional studies of ZEB1
and the splice-variants may unravel novel pathways contributing to MS
pathogenesis and inflammation in general.

PMCID: PMC2939884
PMID: 20856809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Endocrinology. 2010 Nov;151(11):5497-505. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0486. Epub 2010
Sep 15.

Phenotypic plasticity of the ovarian surface epithelium: TGF-beta 1 induction of 
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in vitro.

Zhu Y(1), Nilsson M, Sundfeldt K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Sciences, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Sahlgrenska Academy at Gothenburg University, SE-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2010 Nov;151(11):5092-4.

Ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) is the most conceivable cell origin of
epithelial ovarian carcinomas. Unlike many other epithelial tumors, the
precancerous lesion acquires expression of epithelial markers, e.g. E-cadherin
and claudins, suggesting that OSE cells undergo mesenchymal to epithelial
transition (MET) during transformation. Recent findings indicate that TGF-ß1, a
prototypic stimulus of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), i.e. reverse
to MET, is produced at significant amounts in the intact ovary. In the present
study, we therefore investigated whether TGF-ß1 changes the OSE phenotype
accordingly, focusing on epithelial junction proteins and transcriptional EMT
regulators quantified by real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting in cultured normal
human OSE. Early OSE passages were found to paradoxically express de novo
E-cadherin and also establish tight junctions exhibiting claudin-1 (but not
claudin-3 and -4) and occludin. Stimulation with TGF-ß1 (100 ng/ml) for 3-5 d
down-regulated all these epithelial markers including Crumbs3 and also prevented 
the formation of an epithelial barrier This was accompanied by sustained
expression of Snail and N-cadherin and transient expression of Slug, whereas Zeb1
(zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1) and Twist mRNA levels were not
significantly changed. In conclusion, TGF-ß1 enforces the mesenchymal phenotype
of OSE cells in vitro by an EMT-like process, leading to an altered molecular
composition of the epithelial junction complex that partly coincides with the
expression pattern of the native OSE. This suggests a potential role of
TGF-ß1-induced EMT in OSE under physiological conditions and possibly also in
epithelial ovarian tumorigenesis.

PMID: 20844000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Dec;51(12):6298-302. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5187.
Epub 2010 Sep 1.

Age-severity relationships in families linked to FCD2 with retroillumination
photography.

McGlumphy EJ(1), Yeo WS, Riazuddin SA, Al-Saif A, Wang J, Eghrari AO, Meadows DN,
Emmert DG, Katsanis N, Gottsch JD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Corneal Genetics, Cornea and External Disease Service, The Wilmer
Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21287, USA.

PURPOSE: Fuchs corneal dystrophy (FCD) is a progressive disorder of the corneal
endothelium and is pathologically defined by the presence of guttae, which are
excrescences of the Descemet membrane. The present study was undertaken to
investigate the age-severity relationship of the FCD2-linked disease phenotype
using retroillumination photography and to compare it with the characteristics of
FCD1.
METHODS: Two large families with multiple affected members were recruited.
Exclusion analyses of the known late-onset FCD loci were completed with closely
spaced STR markers, whereas genes associated with early- and late-onset FCD were 
investigated by bidirectional sequencing. Haplotypes were constructed, and
two-point LOD scores were calculated. To document age-severity relationships,
retroillumination photographs were acquired from members of both families.
RESULTS: Parametric linkage and haplotype analysis mapped both families to FCD2
with significant two-point LOD scores. A total of 70,249 guttae were counted in
14 persons from both families. A significant increase in guttae density in the
inferotemporal region (P = 0.016) was observed, a pattern similarly observed in a
family linked to FCD1. Similarly, FCD2-linked families display an exponential
trend in severity with age, as was observed in a family linked to FCD1. Finally, 
comparison of FCD1 and FCD2 exponential models suggested that the FCD1 phenotype 
is significantly more severe (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of genetic mapping and retroillumination photography
was used to quantify the severity of the disease phenotype associated with FCD2
and to compare it to the disease characteristics of FCD1. These data suggest that
this approach might have sufficient resolution to discriminate between discrete
genetic FCD backgrounds, which will potentially aid in patient management.

PMCID: PMC3055756
PMID: 20811064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 16;5(8):e12213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012213.

The PPCD1 mouse: characterization of a mouse model for posterior polymorphous
corneal dystrophy and identification of a candidate gene.

Shen AL(1), O'Leary KA, Dubielzig RR, Drinkwater N, Murphy CJ, Kasper CB,
Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
alshen@wisc.edu

The PPCD1 mouse, a spontaneous mutant that arose in our mouse colony, is
characterized by an enlarged anterior chamber resulting from metaplasia of the
corneal endothelium and blockage of the iridocorneal angle by epithelialized
corneal endothelial cells. The presence of stratified multilayered corneal
endothelial cells with abnormal patterns of cytokeratin expression are remarkably
similar to those observed in human posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy
(PPCD) and the sporadic condition, iridocorneal endothelial syndrome. Affected
eyes exhibit epithelialized corneal endothelial cells, with inappropriate
cytokeratin expression and proliferation over the iridocorneal angle and
posterior cornea. We have termed this the "mouse PPCD1" phenotype and mapped the 
mouse locus for this phenotype, designated "Ppcd1", to a 6.1 Mbp interval on
Chromosome 2, which is syntenic to the human Chromosome 20 PPCD1 interval.
Inheritance of the mouse PPCD1 phenotype is autosomal dominant, with complete
penetrance on the sensitive DBA/2J background and decreased penetrance on the
C57BL/6J background. Comparative genome hybridization has identified a hemizygous
78 Kbp duplication in the mapped interval. The endpoints of the duplication are
located in positions that disrupt the genes Csrp2bp and 6330439K17Rik and lead to
duplication of the pseudogene LOC100043552. Quantitative reverse
transcriptase-PCR indicates that expression levels of Csrp2bp and 6330439K17Rik
are decreased in eyes of PPCD1 mice. Based on the observations of decreased gene 
expression levels, association with ZEB1-related pathways, and the report of
corneal opacities in Csrp2bp(tm1a(KOMP)Wtsi) heterozygotes and embryonic
lethality in nulls, we postulate that duplication of the 78 Kbp segment leading
to haploinsufficiency of Csrp2bp is responsible for the mouse PPCD1 phenotype.
Similarly, CSRP2BP haploinsufficiency may lead to human PPCD.

PMCID: PMC2922377
PMID: 20808945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Cancer Res. 2010 Sep 15;70(18):7155-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0668. Epub 
2010 Aug 31.

BRCA1-associated epigenetic regulation of p73 mediates an effector pathway for
chemosensitivity in ovarian carcinoma.

Ibrahim N(1), He L, Leong CO, Xing D, Karlan BY, Swisher EM, Rueda BR, Orsulic S,
Ellisen LW.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

The majority of tumors arising in BRCA1 mutation carriers exhibit inactivation of
p53, a key effector of cell death after DNA damage. Despite the loss of p53,
BRCA1-deficient tumor cells exhibit increased sensitivity to cisplatin, and
patients with BRCA1-associated ovarian carcinomas experience improved outcomes
with platinum-based chemotherapy compared with sporadic cases. Although it is
known that chemosensitivity in BRCA1-associated cancers is associated with
unrepaired DNA damage, the specific effector pathway mediating the cellular
response to platinum-induced damage in these tumors is poorly understood. Here,
we show that the p53-related gene p73, encoding a proapoptotic protein that is
linked to chemosensitivity in many settings, is upregulated through a novel
epigenetic mechanism in both human and murine models of BRCA1-associated ovarian 
carcinoma. BRCA1-deficient ovarian carcinoma cells exhibit hypermethylation
within a p73 regulatory region, which includes the binding site for the p73
transcriptional repressor ZEB1, leading to the abrogation of ZEB1 binding and
increased expression of transactivating p73 isoforms (TAp73). Cisplatin
chemotherapy induces TAp73 target genes specifically in BRCA1-deficient cells,
and knockdown of TAp73 in these cells causes chemoresistance while having little 
or no effect on BRCA1-expressing tumor cells. In primary ovarian carcinomas, ZEB1
binding site methylation and TAp73 expression correlate with BRCA1 status and
with clinical response. Together, these findings uncover a novel regulatory
mechanism that supports the contribution of TAp73 as an important mediator of the
response to platinum chemotherapy in a subset of ovarian carcinomas. TAp73 might 
represent a response predictor and potential therapeutic target for enhancing
chemosensitivity in this disease.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2940979
PMID: 20807817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. BJU Int. 2011 Feb;107(4):656-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2010.09489.x. Epub 2010
Aug 24.

Novel ZEB1 expression in bladder tumorigenesis.

Kenney PA(1), Wszolek MF, Rieger-Christ KM, Neto BS, Gould JJ, Harty NJ, Mosquera
JM, Zeheb R, Loda M, Darling DS, Libertino JA, Summerhayes IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Lahey Clinic, Burlington, MA, USA.

What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? Epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) is involved in tumor progression where the underlying cellular
changes associated with EMT have been identified in in vitro models and confirmed
in a limited number of in vivo studies. ZEB1, which targets E-cadherin
repression, is a transcriptional regulator that has been implicated in EMT, and
is associated with uterine and colorectal cancers. Regulation of ZEB1 expression 
has been shown to involve different microRNAs (miRNAs), identifying a potential
role for miRNA in EMT. In the present study we have identified novel expression
of ZEB1 in bladder tumours and shown a role for ZEB1 in enhanced migration and
invasion potential in in vitro assays. Confirmation of ZEB1 expression in bladder
tumours was shown in tissue microarrays (TMAs).OBJECTIVE: To evaluate ZEB1
expression in bladder tumorigenesis and define a possible role for this
transcription factor in urothelial carcinomas of the bladder (UCBs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five hundred and fifty-eight samples were assembled in 10 
tissue microarrays (TMAs; 263 non-muscle-invasive Ta/T1/Tis, 295 muscle-invasive 
T2-T4). All tumours were transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs) and processed for
immunohistochemistry to assess nuclear ZEB1 expression. Expression levels of ZEB1
were modulated in bladder carcinoma cell lines CUBIII or UM-UC-3 after forced
expression or shRNA knockdown, respectively. Protein expression levels were
determined using western blot analysis and transfectants were assessed for
migration and invasion potential in standard in vitro assays.
RESULTS: Nuclear ZEB1 expression was recorded in 22.8% of non-muscle-invasive
UCBs and 21.7% of muscle-invasive UCBs, including 24.1% grade I/II and 21.1%
grade III tumours, and absent in normal bladder mucosa. No significant
correlation was observed for tumour stage and grade, nodal involvement, vascular 
invasion, metastasis and overall or cancer-specific survival. The introduction or
knockdown of ZEB1 expression in bladder carcinoma cell lines showed enhanced or
reduced migration and invasive potential, respectively. Changes in ZEB1
expression were accompanied by altered microRNA (miRNA) expression underlying
events linked to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
CONCLUSION: The results in the present study showed novel expression of ZEB1 in
bladder cancer in the absence of a link to clinical variables of change,
including metastasis and survival. However, in vitro assays showed enhanced or
reduced migration and invasion after the introduction or reduction of ZEB1,
respectively, in transfected bladder cell lines. Modulation in expression of ZEB1
was closely linked to changes in the miR-200 family along with alternative known 
prognostic indicators of bladder tumour progression.

© 2010 THE AUTHORS. JOURNAL COMPILATION © 2010 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 20735391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Eur J Haematol. 2010 Dec;85(6):508-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2010.01519.x.

Identification of DeltaEF1 as a novel target that is negatively regulated by LMO2
in T-cell leukemia.

Sun W(1), Yang S, Shen W, Li H, Gao Y, Zhu TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, Nankai University,
Tianjin, China.

The lmo2 gene is a specific oncogene in T-cell leukemia, for its ectopic
expression causes both increased pro-T-cell proliferation and differentiation
arrest, leading to the onset of leukemia. Notably, DeltaEF1 (also known as ZEB1),
a member of zinc finger-homeodomain family transcription factor, also exhibits
crucial function in promoting T-cell differentiation. In this study, we found
that DeltaEF1 was positively regulated by T-lineage-specific transcriptional
regulator GATA3, while ectopically expressed LMO2 targeted to DeltaEF1 promoter
by interaction with GATA3 and inhibited DeltaEF1 expression in transcriptional
level. Moreover, LMO2 interacted with the N-terminal zinc finger domain of
DeltaEF1 protein and inhibited its positive transcriptional regulatory function
by this interaction. Taken together, our findings revealed that ectopically
expressed LMO2 impaired the function of DeltaEF1 in both transcriptional and
protein levels and identified DeltaEF1 as a novel pathogenic target of LMO2 in
T-cell leukemia.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20731704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 29;285(44):33940-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.136044. Epub 2010
Aug 21.

ZEB1 coordinately regulates laminin-332 and {beta}4 integrin expression altering 
the invasive phenotype of prostate cancer cells.

Drake JM(1), Barnes JM, Madsen JM, Domann FE, Stipp CS, Henry MD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Roy J and Lucille ACarver 
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Metastasis involves the invasion of cancer cells across both the extracellular
matrix and cellular barriers, and an evolving theme is that
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may mediate invasive cellular
behavior. Previously, we isolated and analyzed a subpopulation of PC-3 prostate
cancer cells, TEM4-18, and found that these cells both invaded an endothelial
barrier more efficiently and exhibited enhanced metastatic colonization in vivo. 
Transendothelial migration of these cells depended on expression of ZEB1, a known
regulator of EMT. Surprisingly, these cells were much less invasive than parental
PC-3 cells in assays that involve matrix barriers. Here, we report that TEM4-18
cells express significantly reduced levels of two subunits of laminin-332 (ß3 and
<U+03B3>2) and that exogenous laminin-332, or co-culture with laminin-332-expressing
cells, rescues the in vitro invasion phenotype in these cells. Stable knockdown
of ZEB1 in prostate cancer cells up-regulated LAMC2 and ITGB4 mRNA and protein
and resulted in a concomitant increase in Transwell migration. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we show that ZEB1 directly interacts with the
promoters of LAMC2 and ITGB4. These results provide a novel molecular basis for
reduced laminin-332 observed in clinical prostate cancer specimens and
demonstrate a context-dependent role for EMT in invasive cellular behavior.

PMCID: PMC2962494
PMID: 20729552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Mar;226(3):710-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22385.

The Forkhead factor FoxQ1 influences epithelial differentiation.

Feuerborn A(1), Srivastava PK, Küffer S, Grandy WA, Sijmonsma TP, Gretz N, Brors 
B, Gröne HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Centre 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. a.feuerborn@dkfz-heidelberg.de

The Forkhead family of transcription factors comprises numerous members and is
implicated in various cellular functions, including cell growth, apoptosis,
migration, and differentiation. In this study, we identified the Forkhead factor 
FoxQ1 as increased in expression during TGF-ß1 induced changes in epithelial
differentiation, suggesting functional roles of FoxQ1 for epithelial plasticity. 
The repression of FoxQ1 in mammary epithelial cells led to a change in cell
morphology characterized by an increase in cell size, pronounced cell-cell
contacts, and an increased expression of several junction proteins (e.g.,
E-cadherin). In addition, FoxQ1 knock-down cells revealed rearrangements in the
actin-cytoskeleton and slowed down cell cycle G1-phase progression. Furthermore, 
repression of FoxQ1 enhanced the migratory capacity of coherent mammary
epithelial cells. Gene expression profiling of NM18 cells indicated that FoxQ1 is
a relevant downstream mediator of TGF-ß1-induced gene expression changes. This
included the differential expression of transcription factors involved in
epithelial plasticity, for example, Ets-1, Zeb1, and Zeb2. In summary, this study
has elucidated the functional impact of FoxQ1 on epithelial differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20717954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 31;107(35):15449-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004900107. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Core epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition interactome gene-expression signature
is associated with claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancer subtypes.

Taube JH(1), Herschkowitz JI, Komurov K, Zhou AY, Gupta S, Yang J, Hartwell K,
Onder TT, Gupta PB, Evans KW, Hollier BG, Ram PT, Lander ES, Rosen JM, Weinberg
RA, Mani SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 2;107(44):19132.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) produces cancer cells that are
invasive, migratory, and exhibit stem cell characteristics, hallmarks of cells
that have the potential to generate metastases. Inducers of the EMT include
several transcription factors (TFs), such as Goosecoid, Snail, and Twist, as well
as the secreted TGF-beta1. Each of these factors is capable, on its own, of
inducing an EMT in the human mammary epithelial (HMLE) cell line. However, the
interactions between these regulators are poorly understood. Overexpression of
each of the above EMT inducers up-regulates a subset of other EMT-inducing TFs,
with Twist, Zeb1, Zeb2, TGF-beta1, and FOXC2 being commonly induced.
Up-regulation of Slug and FOXC2 by either Snail or Twist does not depend on
TGF-beta1 signaling. Gene expression signatures (GESs) derived by overexpressing 
EMT-inducing TFs reveal that the Twist GES and Snail GES are the most similar,
although the Goosecoid GES is the least similar to the others. An EMT core
signature was derived from the changes in gene expression shared by up-regulation
of Gsc, Snail, Twist, and TGF-beta1 and by down-regulation of E-cadherin, loss of
which can also trigger an EMT in certain cell types. The EMT core signature
associates closely with the claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancer subtypes
and correlates negatively with pathological complete response. Additionally, the 
expression level of FOXC1, another EMT inducer, correlates strongly with poor
survival of breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2932589
PMID: 20713713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. EMBO Rep. 2010 Sep;11(9):670-7. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.117. Epub 2010 Aug 13.

The ZEB/miR-200 feedback loop--a motor of cellular plasticity in development and 
cancer?

Brabletz S(1), Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Hugstetterstrasse 55, 
79106 Freiburg, Germany. thomas.brabletz@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental process in
development and disease. Zinc-finger enhancer binding (ZEB) transcription factors
(ZEB1 and ZEB2) are crucial EMT activators, whereas members of the miR-200 family
induce epithelial differentiation. They are reciprocally linked in a feedback
loop, each strictly controlling the expression of the other. Now data show that
EMT not only confers cellular motility, but also induces stem-cell properties and
prevents apoptosis and senescence. Thus the balanced expression of ZEB factors
and miR-200 controls all these processes. We therefore propose that the
ZEB/miR-200 feedback loop is the molecular motor of cellular plasticity in
development and disease, and in particular is a driving force for cancer
progression towards metastasis by controlling the state of cancer stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2933868
PMID: 20706219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Sep 3;399(4):659-64. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.138. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Molecular characterization of TGFbeta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
in normal finite lifespan human mammary epithelial cells.

Lindley LE(1), Briegel KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a morphogenetic program essential for 
embryonic development and wound healing, but can adversely cause fibrosis and
metastatic cancer progression when deregulated. Here, we established a model of
efficient EMT induction in normal finite lifespan human mammary epithelial cells 
(HMEC) using transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta). We demonstrate that EMT
in HMEC occurs in three distinctive phases that are governed by a hierarchy of
EMT-activating transcription factors (TFs). Loss of epithelial cell polarity
(ZO-1), and acquisition of mesenchymal marker (Vimentin, Fibronectin) expression 
are immediate-early events, whereas switching from E-cadherin to N-cadherin
protein expression occurs only after EMT-like morphological changes become
apparent. The kinetics of TF induction suggests that ZEB1 and SNAIL mediate early
EMT induction reinforced by ZEB2, while GOOSECOID and FOXC2 may play a role in
EMT maintenance. TWIST and SLUG were not significantly induced in this system.
Furthermore, we show for the first time that normal HMEC acquire a
CD44(+)/CD24(-/low) stem cell phenotype during a third phase of EMT that is
characterized by maximum TF expression levels. Our results may have important
implications for understanding potential changes that might occur in normal
breast epithelium under pathological conditions triggering elevated TGFbeta
levels.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20691661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. BMC Res Notes. 2010 Aug 3;3:219. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-3-219.

Role of DNA methylation in miR-200c/141 cluster silencing in invasive breast
cancer cells.

Neves R(1), Scheel C, Weinhold S, Honisch E, Iwaniuk KM, Trompeter HI,
Niederacher D, Wernet P, Santourlidis S, Uhrberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics, University
Clinic Düsseldorf, Moorenstr, 5, Building 14,80, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
uhrberg@itz.uni-duesseldorf.de.

BACKGROUND: The miR-200c/141 cluster has recently been implicated in the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. The expression of these two
miRNAs is inversely correlated with tumorigenicity and invasiveness in several
human cancers. The role of these miRNAs in cancer progression is based in part on
their capacity to target the EMT activators ZEB1 and ZEB2, two transcription
factors, which in turn repress expression of E-cadherin. Little is known about
the regulation of the mir200c/141 cluster, whose targeting has been proposed as a
promising new therapy for the most aggressive tumors.
FINDINGS: We show that the miR-200c/141 cluster is repressed by DNA methylation
of a CpG island located in the promoter region of these miRNAs. Whereas in vitro 
methylation of the miR-200c/141 promoter led to shutdown of promoter activity,
treatment with a demethylating agent caused transcriptional reactivation in
breast cancer cells formerly lacking expression of miR-200c and miR-141. More
importantly, we observed that DNA methylation of the identified miR-200c/141
promoter was tightly correlated with phenotype and the invasive capacity in a
panel of 8 human breast cancer cell lines. In line with this, in vitro induction 
of EMT by ectopic expression of the EMT transcription factor Twist in human
immortalized mammary epithelial cells (HMLE) was accompanied by increased DNA
methylation and concomitant repression of the miR-200c/141 locus.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that expression of the miR-200c/141
cluster is regulated by DNA methylation, suggesting epigenetic regulation of this
miRNA locus in aggressive breast cancer cell lines as well as untransformed
mammary epithelial cells. This epigenetic silencing mechanism might represent a
novel component of the regulatory circuit for the maintenance of EMT programs in 
cancer and normal cells.

PMCID: PMC3161370
PMID: 20682048  [PubMed]


362. J Virol. 2010 Oct;84(19):10329-43. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00923-10. Epub 2010 Jul 28.

Cellular microRNAs 200b and 429 regulate the Epstein-Barr virus switch between
latency and lytic replication.

Ellis-Connell AL(1), Iempridee T, Xu I, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706-1599, USA.

We previously showed that the cellular proteins ZEB1 and ZEB2/SIP1 both play key 
roles in regulating the latent-lytic switch of Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) by
repressing BZLF1 gene expression. We investigated here the effects of cellular
microRNA (miRNA) 200 (miR200) family members on the EBV infection status of
cells. We show that miR200b and miR429, but not miR200a, can induce EBV-positive 
cells into lytic replication by downregulating expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2,
leading to production of infectious virus. The levels of miR200 family members in
EBV-infected cells strongly negatively correlated with the levels of the ZEBs
(e.g., -0.89 [P < 0.001] for miR429 versus ZEB1) and positively correlated with
the degree of EBV lytic gene expression (e.g., 0.73 [P < 0.01] for miR429 versus 
BZLF1). The addition of either miR200b or miR429 to EBV-positive cells led to EBV
lytic reactivation in a ZEB-dependent manner; inhibition of these miRNAs led to
decreased EBV lytic gene expression. The degree of latent infection by an EBV
mutant defective in the primary ZEB-binding site of the EBV BZLF1 promoter was
not affected by the addition of these miRNAs. Furthermore, EBV infection of
primary blood B cells led to downregulation of these miRNAs and upregulation of
ZEB levels. Thus, we conclude that miRNAs 200b and 429 are key regulators via
their effects on expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 of the switch between latent and
lytic infection by EBV and, therefore, potential targets for development of new
lytic induction therapeutics with which to treat patients with EBV-associated
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2937814
PMID: 20668090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Dec 1;88(3):502-11. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq236. Epub 2010 Jul
14.

Endothelial progenitor cells undergo an endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition-like process mediated by TGFbetaRI.

Díez M(1), Musri MM, Ferrer E, Barberà JA, Peinado VI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Ciber de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Universitat 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

AIMS: Endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) have been shown to repair pulmonary
endothelium, although they can also migrate into the arterial intima and
differentiate into smooth muscle-like (mesenchymal) cells contributing to intimal
hyperplasia. The molecular mechanisms by which this process proceeds have not
been fully elucidated. Here, we study whether genes involved in the
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EnMT) may contribute to the mesenchymal
phenotype acquisition of EPC and we evaluate whether transforming growth factor
ß1 (TGFß1) is involved in this process.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Our results show that co-culture of EPC with smooth muscle
cells (SMC) increases the expression of the mesenchymal cell markers a-smooth
muscle actin, sm22-a, and myocardin, and decreases the expression of the
endothelial cell marker CD31. In the same conditions, we also observed a
concomitant increase in the gene expression of the EnMT-related transcription
factors: slug, snail, zeb1, and endothelin-1. This indicates that mesenchymal
phenotype acquisition occurred through an EnMT-like process. Inhibition of TGFß
receptor I (TGFßRI) downregulated snail gene expression, blocked the EnMT, and
facilitated the differentiation of EPC to the endothelial cell lineage.
Furthermore, TGFßRI inhibition decreased migration of EPC stimulated by SMC
without affecting their functionality and adhesion capacity.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that EPC may differentiate into SMC-like cells
through an EnMT-like process and that TGFßI plays an important role in the fate
of EPC.

PMID: 20631156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010 Dec;17(12):3379-85. doi: 10.1245/s10434-010-1163-4. Epub
2010 Jul 13.

Knockdown of thrombomodulin enhances HCC cell migration through increase of ZEB1 
and decrease of E-cadherin gene expression.

Huang MT(1), Wei PL, Liu JJ, Liu DZ, Huey-Chun H, An J, Wu CC, Wu CH, Ho YS, Yang
YY, Chang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University, Taipei City, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Thrombomodulin (TM) is a key molecule mediating circulation
homeostasis through its binding to thrombin. The TM-thrombin complex can activate
protein C and thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor to form a tight clot.
In many cancer tissues, decrease of TM expression may correlate with cancer
metastasis. However, the role of TM in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression
is still unclear.
METHODS: We characterized TM expression in HCC cells (HepJ5 and skHep-1 cells)
using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blotting. We then
manipulated TM expression using both TM-specific short hairpin RNA (shRNA) and
overexpressing it in HCC cells. Transwell migration assay was performed to
monitor the migratory ability of HCC cells under different levels of TM
expression.
RESULTS: We found that TM was ectopically highly expressed in skHep-1 at both
transcriptional and translational levels. After silencing TM expression in
skHep-1 cells, we found that metastatic capability was dramatically increased.
Conversely, overexpression of TM in HepJ5 cells decreased metastatic ability. We 
investigated the possible mechanism and found that decreased TM-mediated
enhancement of cell migration was dependent on upregulation of ZEB1, a repressor 
of E-cadherin.
CONCLUSIONS: TM may be a modulator of cancer metastasis in HCC. Downregulation of
TM expression may increase ZEB1 and decrease E-cadherin levels.

PMID: 20625840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Cell. 2010 Jun 25;38(6):908-15. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.018.

miR-200c regulates induction of apoptosis through CD95 by targeting FAP-1.

Schickel R(1), Park SM, Murmann AE, Peter ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Tumor progression shares many characteristics with the process of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Cells that have undergone an EMT are 
known to have an increased resistance to apoptosis. CD95/Fas is an
apoptosis-inducing receptor expressed on many tissues and tumor cells. During
tumor progression CD95 is frequently downregulated, and tumor cells lose
apoptosis sensitivity. miR-200 microRNAs repress both the EMT-inducing ZEB1 and
ZEB2 transcription factors. We now demonstrate that miR-200c sensitizes cells to 
apoptosis mediated by CD95. We have identified the apoptosis inhibitor FAP-1 as a
target for miR-200c. FAP-1 was demonstrated to be responsible for the reduced
sensitivity to CD95-mediated apoptosis in cells with inhibited miR-200. The
identification of FAP-1 as an miR-200c target provides a molecular mechanism to
explain both the downregulation of CD95 expression and the reduction in
sensitivity of cells to CD95-mediated apoptosis that is observed in the context
of reduced miR-200 expression during tumor progression.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2904349
PMID: 20620960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jul 8;9:180. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-180.

Characterizing cancer cells with cancer stem cell-like features in 293T human
embryonic kidney cells.

Debeb BG(1), Zhang X, Krishnamurthy S, Gao H, Cohen E, Li L, Rodriguez AA, Landis
MD, Lucci A, Ueno NT, Robertson F, Xu W, Lacerda L, Buchholz TA, Cristofanilli M,
Reuben JM, Lewis MT, Woodward WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Since the first suggestion of prospectively identifiable cancer stem 
cells in solid tumors, efforts have been made to characterize reported cancer
stem cell surrogates in existing cancer cell lines, and cell lines rich with
these surrogates have been used to screen for cancer stem cell targeted agents.
Although 293T cells were derived from human embryonic kidney, transplantation of 
these cells into the mammary fat pad yields aggressive tumors that self-renew as 
evidenced by serial xenograft passages through transplantation. Herein we fully
characterize cancer stem cell-like features in 293T human embryonic kidney cells.
RESULTS: 293T cells can be readily cultured and passaged as spheres in serum-free
stem cell promoting culture conditions. Cells cultured in vitro as
three-dimensional spheres (3D) were shown to contain higher ALDH1 and CD44+/CD24-
population compared to monolayer cells. These cells were also resistant to
radiation and upregulate stem cell survival signaling including beta-catenin,
Notch1 and Survivin in response to radiation. Moreover, 3D spheres generated from
the 293T cells have increased expression of mesenchymal genes including vimentin,
n-cadherin, zeb1, snail and slug as well as pro-metastatic genes RhoC, Tenascin C
and MTA1. In addition, microRNAs implicated in self-renewal and metastases were
markedly reduced in 3D spheres.
CONCLUSIONS: 293T cells exhibit a cancer stem cell-like phenotype when cultured
as 3D spheres and represent an important research tool for studying the molecular
and biological mechanisms of cancer stem cells and for testing and developing
novel targets for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC2915978
PMID: 20615238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Aug 1;10(3):219-22. Epub 2010 Aug 1.

The role of the miR-200 family in epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Mongroo PS(1), Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Genetics, Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are single-stranded, non-coding RNA molecules that regulate
gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. Genes encoding miRNAs are
located in regions of the genome that are commonly amplified, deleted or
rearranged. They are commonly dysregulated in human cancers and known to act as
oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Members of the miR-200 miRNA family are
downregulated in human cancer cells and tumors due to aberrant epigenetic gene
silencing and play a critical role in the suppression of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), tumor cell adhesion, migration,
invasion and metastasis, by targeting and repressing the expression of key mRNAs 
that are involved in EMT (ZEB1 and ZEB2), ß-catenin/Wnt signaling (ß-catenin),
EGFR inhibitor resistance (ERRFI-1) and chemoresistance to therapeutic agents
(TUBB3). Since the miR-200 family functions as putative tumor suppressors and
represent biomarkers for poorly differentiated and aggressive cancers,
restoration of miR-200 expression may have therapeutic implications for the
treatment of metastatic and drug-resistant tumors.

PMCID: PMC3040834
PMID: 20592490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Digestion. 2010;82(3):138-44. doi: 10.1159/000310918. Epub 2010 Jun 25.

MicroRNAs and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Matsushima K(1), Isomoto H, Kohno S, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nagasaki University Hospital,
Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan.

Esophageal cancer is a common cause of cancer death worldwide. Esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the most predominant type. Certain microRNAs
(miRNAs) function in tumorgenesis involved in important biological and pathologic
processes. To reveal miRNAs' signatures of ESCC, we analyzed miRNAs extracted
from ESCC cell lines with the microRNA microarray. The significant alterations
were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR using miRNAs extracted from cell
lines or patients' esophageal biopsy tissues. We found that miR-205 and miR-10a
were significantly altered in cellular expression, and might be specific for ESCC
with potential roles in the pathogenesis. As a result of function studies in
miR-205, alterations in miR-205 expression could modulate the phenotype of
epithelial cells towards epithelial-mesenchymal transition characterized by
reduced abundance of E-cadherin, that is the ESCC-specific miRNA target and
inhibit translationally a representative E-cadherin repressor, ZEB1 and ZEB2.
Similarly, miR-10a is reported as a tumor suppressor by controlling cell
migration/invasion, as it can target homeobox genes. These results provide
insight into the potential mechanisms of ESCC in the pathogenesis. This review
also includes a comprehensive overview of the relationship between miRNAs and
ESCC.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20588024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 Oct;88(10):1041-53. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0643-0. Epub
2010 Jun 25.

MIR152, MIR200B, and MIR338, human positional and functional neuroblastoma
candidates, are involved in neuroblast differentiation and apoptosis.

Ragusa M(1), Majorana A, Banelli B, Barbagallo D, Statello L, Casciano I,
Guglielmino MR, Duro LR, Scalia M, Magro G, Di Pietro C, Romani M, Purrello M.

Author information: 
(1)Unità di BioMedicina Molecolare Genomica e dei Sistemi Complessi, Genetica,
Biologia Computazionale G Sichel, Dipartimento di Scienze BioMediche, Sezione di 
Biologia Generale, Biologia Cellulare, Genetica Molecolare, Università degli
Studi di Catania, 95123, Catania, Italy.

MicroRNAs (MIRs) perform critical regulatory functions within cell networks, both
in physiology as well as in pathology. Through the positional gene candidate
approach, we have identified three MIRs (MIR152, MIR200B, and MIR338) that are
located in regions frequently altered in neuroblastoma (NB) and target mRNAs
encoding proteins involved in cell proliferation, neuroblast differentiation,
neuroblast migration, and apoptosis. Expression analysis in NB biopsies and NB
cell lines showed that these MIRs are dysregulated. We have characterized a CpG
island, close to the gene encoding MIR200B and hypermethylated in NB samples,
that explains its negative regulation. Expression of MIR152, MIR200B, and MIR338 
is specifically modulated in NB cell lines during differentiation and apoptosis. 
Functional genomic experiments through enforced expression of MIR200B and
knockdown of MIR152 resulted in a significant decrease of the invasion activity
of SH-SY5Y cells. Reconstruction of a NB network comprising MIR152, MIR200B, and 
MIR338 allowed us to confirm their role in the control of NB cell stemness and
apoptosis: This suggests that altered regulation of these MIRs could have a role 
in NB pathogenesis by interfering with the molecular mechanisms, which
physiologically control differentiation and death of neuroblasts. Accordingly,
they could be considered as new NB biomarkers and potential targets of antagomirs
or epigenetic therapies.

PMID: 20574809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cornea. 2010 Oct;29(10):1180-5. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0b013e3181d007e1.

Unusual presentation of presumed posterior polymorphous dystrophy associated with
iris heterochromia, band keratopathy, and keratoconus.

Lam HY(1), Wiggs JL, Jurkunas UV.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA, USA. helene_lam@vmed.org

PURPOSE: To report an unusual presentation of posterior polymorphous corneal
dystrophy (PPCD) associated with band keratopathy, iridocorneal adhesions,
heterochromia, keratoconus, and confocal microscopic findings suggestive of
iridocorneal endothelial syndrome.
METHODS: Confocal microscopy, corneal topography, electroretinography, and
genetic analysis were performed in the proband and his siblings.
RESULTS: A 23-year-old man presented with decreased vision in both eyes over 9
months. Examination revealed bilateral alterations in corneal endothelial mosaic 
with corneal edema and beaten metal appearance in the right eye and cystoid
endothelial opacities in the left eye. Marked heterochromia, band keratopathy,
and broad peripheral anterior synechiae were present in both eyes. Topographic
features of keratoconus were noted. Electroretinography did not detect abnormal
retinal function, as has been described with PPCD associated with VSX1 mutations.
Diagnosis of PPCD was postulated on the basis of the examination of 3 of
proband's brothers by confocal microscopy. Genetic analysis of 3 known PPCD
genes, VSX1, COL8A2, and TCF8, did not detect any mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: In severe cases, PPCD can resemble iridocorneal endothelial
syndromes in both clinical appearance and imaging studies (confocal microscopy). 
There was a strong genetic phenotypic penetrance in the family, which was
essential in the diagnostic decision making. A yet undetermined genotype is
contributing to this unusual PPCD phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2945457
PMID: 20567203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Hepatology. 2010 Sep;52(3):945-53. doi: 10.1002/hep.23748.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of murine liver tumor cells promotes
invasion.

Ding W(1), You H, Dang H, LeBlanc F, Galicia V, Lu SC, Stiles B, Rountree CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pharmacology, The Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is predicted to play a critical role
in metastatic disease in hepatocellular carcinoma. In this study, we used a novel
murine model of EMT to elucidate a mechanism of tumor progression and metastasis.
A total of 2 x 10(6) liver cells isolated from Pten(loxp/loxp)/Alb-Cre(+) mice,
expanded from a single CD133(+)CD45(-) cell clone, passage 0 (P0), were
sequentially transplanted to obtain two passages of tumor cells, P1 and P2. Cells
were analyzed for gene expression using microarray and real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Functional analysis included cell proliferation, migration, and
invasion in vitro and orthotopic tumor metastasis assays in vivo. Although P0,
P1, and P2 each formed tumors consistent with mixed liver epithelium, within the 
P2 cells, two distinct cell types were clearly visible: cells with epithelial
morphology similar to P0 cells and cells with fibroblastoid morphology. These P2 
mesenchymal cells demonstrated increased locomotion on wound healing; increased
cell invasion on Matrigel basement membrane; increased EMT-associated gene
expression of Snail1, Zeb1, and Zeb2; and down-regulated E-cadherin. P2
mesenchymal cells demonstrated significantly faster tumor growth in vivo compared
with P2 epithelial counterparts, with invasion of intestine, pancreas, spleen,
and lymph nodes. Furthermore, P2 mesenchymal cells secreted high levels of
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), which we propose acts in a paracrine fashion to
drive epithelial cells to undergo EMT. In addition, a second murine liver cancer 
stem cell line with methionine adenosyltransferase 1a deficiency acquired EMT
after sequential transplantations, indicating that EMT was not restricted to
Pten-deleted tumors.CONCLUSION: EMT is associated with a high rate of liver tumor
proliferation, invasion, and metastasis in vivo, which is driven by HGF secreted 
from mesenchymal tumor cells in a feed-forward mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3032356
PMID: 20564331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Oncogene. 2010 Aug 26;29(34):4800-13. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.225. Epub 2010 Jun
14.

SPROUTY-2 and E-cadherin regulate reciprocally and dictate colon cancer cell
tumourigenicity.

Barbáchano A(1), Ordóñez-Morán P, García JM, Sánchez A, Pereira F, Larriba MJ,
Martínez N, Hernández J, Landolfi S, Bonilla F, Pálmer HG, Rojas JM, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
'Alberto Sols', Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

SPROUTY-2 (SPRY2) regulates receptor tyrosine kinase signalling and therefore
cell growth and differentiation. In this study, we show that SPRY2 expression in 
colon cancer cells is inhibited by the active vitamin D metabolite
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) through E-cadherin-dependent
and -independent mechanisms. In turn, SPRY2 represses both basal and
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced E-cadherin expression. In line with this, SPRY2 induces
ZEB1 RNA and protein, but not that of other epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
inducers that repress the CDH1/E-cadherin promoter. Consistently, SPRY2 and
E-cadherin protein levels inversely correlate in colon cancer cell lines and
xenografted tumours. Moreover, SPRY2 knockdown by small hairpin RNA increases
CDH1/E-cadherin expression and, reciprocally, CDH1/E-cadherin knockdown increases
that of SPRY2. In colon cancer patients, SPRY2 is upregulated in undifferentiated
high-grade tumours and at the invasive front of low-grade carcinomas.
Quantification of protein expression in 34 tumours confirmed an inverse
correlation between SPRY2 and E-cadherin. Our data demonstrate a tumourigenic
action of SPRY2 that is based on the repression of E-cadherin, probably by the
induction of ZEB1, and a reciprocal regulation of SPRY2 and E-cadherin that
dictates cell phenotype. We propose SPRY2 as a candidate novel marker for
high-grade tumours and a target of therapeutic intervention in colon cancer.

PMID: 20543868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jun 15;9(12):2363-74. Epub 2010 Jun 15.

Transcriptional crosstalk between TGF-ß and stem cell pathways in tumor cell
invasion: role of EMT promoting Smad complexes.

Fuxe J(1), Vincent T, Garcia de Herreros A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
jonas.fuxe@ki.se

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 1;9(13):2499-500.

Tumor cells undergoing the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) acquire the
capacity to migrate, invade the stroma and metastasize. EMT cells also acquire
stem cell characteristics suggesting crosstalk between EMT and stem cell pathways
and contribution of the EMT process to the generation of cancer stem cells.
Indeed, transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß), a major inducer of EMT,
cooperates with stem cell pathways like Wnt, Ras, Hedgehog and Notch to induce
EMT. A molecular basis for this cooperative signaling is indicated by recent data
showing that many EMT associated transcription factors like Snail1, Zeb1/2,
Twist, ß-catenin, Lef/TCF, Foxc2 and AP-1 interact with Smads and form EMT
promoting Smad complexes (EPSC) engaged in both repressing epithelial genes and
activating mesenchymal genes. Thus, formation and activation of EPSC seems to
represent a point of convergence between EMT and stem cell pathways. Here, we
review our current understanding of the mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional crosstalk between TGF-ß and stem cell pathways and discuss how a 
fundament for the activation of these mechanisms may lead to the induction of EMT
in tumors.

PMID: 20519943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Exp Mol Pathol. 2010 Oct;89(2):182-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2010.05.010. Epub 2010
May 31.

Novel monoclonal antibodies detect Smad-interacting protein 1 (SIP1) in the
cytoplasm of human cells from multiple tumor tissue arrays.

Oztas E(1), Avci ME, Ozcan A, Sayan AE, Tulchinsky E, Yagci T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara,
Turkey.

Smad-interacting protein 1 (SIP1, also known as ZEB2) represses the transcription
of E-cadherin and mediates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in development and
tumor metastasis. Due to the lack of human SIP1-specific antibodies, its
expression in human tumor tissues has not been studied in detail by
immunohistochemistry. Hence, we generated two anti-SIP1 monoclonal antibodies,
clones 1C6 and 6E5, with IgG1 and IgG2a isotypes, respectively. The specificity
of these antibodies was shown by Western blotting studies using siRNA mediated
downregulation of SIP1 and ZEB1 in a human osteosarcoma cell line. In the same
context, we also compared them with 5 commercially available SIP1 antibodies.
Antibody specificity was further verified in an inducible cell line system by
immunofluorescence. By using both antibodies, we evaluated the tissue expression 
of SIP1 in paraffin-embedded tissue microarrays consisting of 22 normal and 101
tumoral tissues of kidney, colon, stomach, lung, esophagus, uterus, rectum,
breast and liver. Interestingly, SIP1 predominantly displayed a cytoplasmic
expression, while the nuclear localization of SIP1 was observed in only 6 cases. 
Strong expression of SIP1 was found in distal tubules of kidney, glandular
epithelial cells of stomach and hepatocytes, implicating a co-expression of SIP1 
and E-cadherin. Squamous epithelium of the esophagus and surface epithelium of
colon and rectum were stained with moderate to weak intensity. Normal uterus,
breast and lung tissues remained completely negative. By comparison with their
normal tissues, we observed SIP1 overexpression in cancers of the kidney, breast,
lung and uterus. However, SIP1 expression was found to be downregulated in tumors
from colon, rectum, esophagus, liver and stomach tissues. Finally we did
nuclear/cytoplasmic fractionation in 3 carcinoma cell lines and detected SIP1 in 
both fractions, nucleus being the dominant one. To our best knowledge, this is
the first comprehensive immunohistochemical study of the expression of SIP1 in a 
series of human cancers. Our finding that SIP1 is not exclusively localized to
nucleus suggests that the subcellular localization of SIP1 is regulated in normal
and tumor tissues. These novel monoclonal antibodies may help elucidate the role 
of SIP1 in tumor development.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20515682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 22;29(29):4157-69. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.172. Epub 2010 May
31.

Downregulation of ZEB1 and overexpression of Smad7 contribute to resistance to
TGF-beta1-mediated growth suppression in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.

Nakahata S(1), Yamazaki S, Nakauchi H, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.

Erratum in
    Oncogene. 2011 Jun 23;30(25):2900.

Zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a candidate tumor-suppressor gene 
in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL). ZEB1 binds phosphorylated Smad2/3 to
enhance transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) signaling. In addition to
downregulation of ZEB1 mRNA, we found overexpression of inhibitory Smad, Smad7,
in resistance of ATLL cells to growth suppression by TGF-beta1. A protein complex
of Smad7 and histone deacetylase constantly bound to the promoter region of
TGF-beta1 responsive genes with the Smad-responsive element (SRE) to inhibit
TGF-beta1 signaling; however, ectopic expression of ZEB1 reactivated TGF-beta1
signaling by binding to Smad7 and recruiting the Smad3/p300 histone
acetyltransferase complex to the promoter after TGF-beta1 stimulation in ATLL.
Conversely, because ZEB1 mRNA was detected in the late stages of T-cell
development, we used CTLL2 cells with ZEB1 expression, a murine peripheral T-cell
lymphoma, and found that a complex of Smad3, Smad7 and ZEB1 was bound to the SRE 
of the p21(CDKN1A) promoter after the induction of Smad7 by TGF-beta1 treatment. 
Because the duration of TGF-beta1-induced transcriptional activation of PAI-1 and
p21 was shortened in shZEB1-expressing CTLL2 cells, ZEB1 may have a role in
enhancing TGF-beta1 signaling by binding not only to Smad3 but also to Smad7 in
the nucleus. Altogether, these results suggest that both ZEB1 downregulation and 
Smad7 overexpression contribute to resistance to TGF-beta1-mediated growth
suppression in ATLL.

PMID: 20514018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Virol. 2010 Aug;84(15):7892-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00379-10. Epub 2010 May 19.

Differential expression of the miR-200 family microRNAs in epithelial and B cells
and regulation of Epstein-Barr virus reactivation by the miR-200 family member
miR-429.

Lin Z(1), Wang X, Fewell C, Cameron J, Yin Q, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SL-79, Tulane Health Sciences Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70112, USA.

The miR-200 microRNA family is important for maintaining the epithelial
phenotype, partially through suppressing ZEB1 and ZEB2. Since ZEB1 inhibits
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) reactivation, we hypothesized that expression of miR-200
family members in epithelial cells may partly account for higher levels of EBV
reactivation in this tissue (relative to nonplasma B cells). Here we show that,
whereas miR-200 family members are expressed in epithelial cells, their
expression is low in latently infected B cells. Furthermore, the miR-200 family
member miR-429 shows elevated expression in plasma cell lines and is induced by
B-cell-receptor activation in Akata cells. Lastly, expression of miR-429 can
break latency.

PMCID: PMC2897641
PMID: 20484493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Cancer Res. 2010 Jun 1;70(11):4719-27. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4620. Epub
2010 May 18.

Downregulation of microRNA-200 in EBV-associated gastric carcinoma.

Shinozaki A(1), Sakatani T, Ushiku T, Hino R, Isogai M, Ishikawa S, Uozaki H,
Takada K, Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

EBV-associated gastric carcinoma is a distinct gastric carcinoma subtype with
characteristic morphologic features similar to those of cells that undergo
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. The effect of microRNA abnormalities in
carcinogenesis was investigated by measuring the expression of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-related microRNAs, miR-200a and miR-200b, in
36 surgically resected gastric carcinomas using quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR analysis. MiR-200 family expression was decreased in
EBV-associated gastric carcinoma, as compared with that in EBV-negative
carcinoma. Downregulation of the miR-200 family was found in gastric carcinoma
cell lines infected with recombinant EBV (MKN74-EBV, MKN7-EBV, and NUGC3-EBV),
accompanied by the loss of cell adhesion, reduction of E-cadherin expression, and
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2. E-cadherin expression was partially restored by
transfection of EBV-infected cells with miR-200 family precursors. Reverse
transcription-PCR analysis of primary precursors of miR-200 (pri-miR-200)
revealed that the transcription of pri-miR-200 was decreased in EBV-infected
cells. Transfection of MKN74 cells with BARF0, EBNA1, and LMP2A resulted in a
decrease of pri-miR-200, whereas transfection with EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER)
did not. These four latent genes contributed to the downregulation of the mature 
miR-200 family and the subsequent upregulation of ZEB1/ZEB2, resulting in the
reduction of E-cadherin expression. These findings indicate that all the latency 
type I genes have a synergetic effect on the downregulation of the miR-200 family
that leads to reduced E-cadherin expression, which is a crucial step in the
carcinogenesis of EBV-associated gastric carcinoma.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20484038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Int J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;128(6):1327-34. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25461.

Coordinated epigenetic repression of the miR-200 family and miR-205 in invasive
bladder cancer.

Wiklund ED(1), Bramsen JB, Hulf T, Dyrskjøt L, Ramanathan R, Hansen TB, Villadsen
SB, Gao S, Ostenfeld MS, Borre M, Peter ME, Ørntoft TF, Kjems J, Clark SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small noncoding RNAs commonly deregulated in cancer. The
miR-200 family (miR-200a, -200b, -200c, -141 and -429) and miR-205 are frequently
silenced in advanced cancer and have been implicated in epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and tumor invasion by targeting the transcriptional repressors
of E-cadherin, ZEB1 and ZEB2. ZEB1 is also known to repress miR-200c-141
transcription in a negative feedback loop, but otherwise little is known about
the transcriptional regulation of the miR-200 family and miR-205. Recently,
miR-200 silencing was also reported in cancer stem cells, implying that miR-200
deregulation is a key event in multiple levels of tumor biology. However, what
prevents miR-200 expression remains largely unanswered. Here we report concerted 
transcriptional regulation of the miR-200 and miR-205 loci in bladder tumors and 
bladder cell lines. Using a combination of miRNA expression arrays, qPCR assays
and mass spectrometry DNA methylation analyses, we show that the miR-200 and
miR-205 loci are specifically silenced and gain promoter hypermethylation and
repressive chromatin marks in muscle invasive bladder tumors and undifferentiated
bladder cell lines. Moreover, we report that miR-200c expression is significantly
correlated with early stage T1 bladder tumor progression, and propose miR-200 and
miR-205 silencing and DNA hypermethylation as possible prognostic markers in
bladder cancer. In addition, we observe that the mesoderm transcription factor
TWIST1 and miR-200 expression are inversely correlated in bladder tumor samples
and cell lines. TWIST1 associates directly with the miR-200 and miR-205
promoters, and may act as a repressor of miR-200 and miR-205 expression.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20473948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Cancer Lett. 2010 Oct 28;296(2):216-24. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.04.008. Epub
2010 May 7.

Knockdown of ZEB1, a master epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) gene,
suppresses anchorage-independent cell growth of lung cancer cells.

Takeyama Y(1), Sato M, Horio M, Hase T, Yoshida K, Yokoyama T, Nakashima H,
Hashimoto N, Sekido Y, Gazdar AF, Minna JD, Kondo M, Hasegawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

We found that among four master epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-inducing genes (ZEB1, SIP1, Snail, and Slug) ZEB1expression was most
significantly correlated with the mesenchymal phenotype (high Vimentin and low
E-cadherin expression) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and
tumors. Furthermore, ZEB1 knockdown with RNA interference in three NSCLC cell
lines with high ZEB1 expression suppressed to varying degrees mass culture growth
and liquid colony formation but in all cases dramatically suppressed soft agar
colony formation. In addition, ZEB1 knockdown induced apoptosis in one of the
three lines, indicating that the growth inhibitory effects of ZEB1 knockdown
occurs in part through the activation of the apoptosis pathway. These results
suggest that inhibiting ZEB1 function may be an attractive target for NSCLC
therapeutic development.

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3110825
PMID: 20452118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Oncol Rep. 2010 Jun;23(6):1545-52.

Silibinin reverses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in metastatic prostate
cancer cells by targeting transcription factors.

Wu K(1), Zeng J, Li L, Fan J, Zhang D, Xue Y, Zhu G, Yang L, Wang X, He D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, PR China.

Silibinin, a naturally occurring flavanone isolated from milk thistle extract,
has been shown to possess strong anticancer efficacy against both
androgen-dependent and androgen-independent prostate cancer, wherein it inhibits 
not only cell growth, but also cell invasion and metastasis. Inhibitory effects
of silibinin on prostate cancer invasion, motility and migration were previously 
observed in the highly bone metastatic ARCaP M cell line; however, mechanisms of 
such efficacy are not completely elucidated. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is a crucial step in the progression of prostate cancer,
reversal or inhibition of EMT by drugs thus provides a new approach to prostate
cancer therapy. In the present study, we found that silibinin treatment resulted 
in the up-regulation of cytokeratin-18 and down-regulation of vimentin and MMP2, 
which was consistent with morphologic reversal of EMT phenotype leading to be
epithelial. Moreover, we found that silibinin could inhibit the nuclear factor
kappaB (NF-kappaB) p50 translocation via the up-regulation of I kappaB alpha
protein, and possibly subsequently down-regulated the expression of two major EMT
regulators, ZEB1 and SLUG transcription factors. Overall these findings
demonstrate silibinin was able to reverse EMT to suppress the invasive property
of metastatic prostate cancer cells at the transcriptional level.

PMID: 20428808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cancer Res. 2010 May 15;70(10):4174-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4614. Epub 
2010 Apr 27.

Epidermal growth factor receptor and mutant p53 expand an esophageal cellular
subpopulation capable of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition through ZEB
transcription factors.

Ohashi S(1), Natsuizaka M, Wong GS, Michaylira CZ, Grugan KD, Stairs DB, Kalabis 
J, Vega ME, Kalman RA, Nakagawa M, Klein-Szanto AJ, Herlyn M, Diehl JA, Rustgi
AK, Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a potent inducer of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, it remains elusive about which molecular
mechanisms determine the cellular capacity to undergo EMT in response to
TGF-beta. We have found that both epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
overexpression and mutant p53 tumor suppressor genes contribute to the enrichment
of an EMT-competent cellular subpopulation among telomerase-immortalized human
esophageal epithelial cells during malignant transformation. EGFR overexpression 
triggers oncogene-induced senescence, accompanied by the induction of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p15(INK4B), p16(INK4A), and p21.
Interestingly, a subpopulation of cells emerges by negating senescence without
loss of EGFR overexpression. Such cell populations express increased levels of
zinc finger E-box binding (ZEB) transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2, and undergo 
EMT on TGF-beta stimulation. Enrichment of EMT-competent cells was more evident
in the presence of p53 mutation, which diminished EGFR-induced senescence. RNA
interference directed against ZEB resulted in the induction of p15(INK4B) and
p16(INK4A), reactivating the EGFR-dependent senescence program. Importantly,
TGF-beta-mediated EMT did not take place when cellular senescence programs were
activated by either ZEB knockdown or the activation of wild-type p53 function.
Thus, senescence checkpoint functions activated by EGFR and p53 may be evaded
through the induction of ZEB, thereby allowing the expansion of an EMT-competent 
unique cellular subpopulation, providing novel mechanistic insights into the role
of ZEB in esophageal carcinogenesis.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3007622
PMID: 20424117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 14;5(4):e10162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010162.

Module network inference from a cancer gene expression data set identifies
microRNA regulated modules.

Bonnet E(1), Tatari M, Joshi A, Michoel T, Marchal K, Berx G, Van de Peer Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Gent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNAs that recognize and regulate mRNA
target genes. Multiple lines of evidence indicate that they are key regulators of
numerous critical functions in development and disease, including cancer.
However, defining the place and function of miRNAs in complex regulatory networks
is not straightforward. Systems approaches, like the inference of a module
network from expression data, can help to achieve this goal.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: During the last decade, much progress has been
made in the development of robust and powerful module network inference
algorithms. In this study, we analyze and assess experimentally a module network 
inferred from both miRNA and mRNA expression data, using our recently developed
module network inference algorithm based on probabilistic optimization
techniques. We show that several miRNAs are predicted as statistically
significant regulators for various modules of tightly co-expressed genes. A
detailed analysis of three of those modules demonstrates that the specific
assignment of miRNAs is functionally coherent and supported by literature. We
further designed a set of experiments to test the assignment of miR-200a as the
top regulator of a small module of nine genes. The results strongly suggest that 
miR-200a is regulating the module genes via the transcription factor ZEB1.
Interestingly, this module is most likely involved in epithelial homeostasis and 
its dysregulation might contribute to the malignant process in cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results show that a robust module network analysis 
of expression data can provide novel insights of miRNA function in important
cellular processes. Such a computational approach, starting from expression data 
alone, can be helpful in the process of identifying the function of miRNAs by
suggesting modules of co-expressed genes in which they play a regulatory role. As
shown in this study, those modules can then be tested experimentally to further
investigate and refine the function of the miRNA in the regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC2854686
PMID: 20418949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Oncogene. 2010 Jun 17;29(24):3490-500. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.102. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

ZEB1 represses E-cadherin and induces an EMT by recruiting the SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling protein BRG1.

Sánchez-Tilló E(1), Lázaro A, Torrent R, Cuatrecasas M, Vaquero EC, Castells A,
Engel P, Postigo A.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Regulation, Department of Oncology and Hematology,
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.

Loss of E-cadherin is a key initial step in the transdifferentiation of
epithelial cells to a mesenchymal phenotype, which occurs when tumor epithelial
cells invade into surrounding tissues. Expression of the nuclear factor ZEB1
induces an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and confers a metastatic
phenotype on carcinomas by repressing the E-cadherin gene at the transcriptional 
level. In this study, we show that ZEB1 interacts with the SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling protein BRG1 to regulate E-cadherin independently of CtBP,
its traditional co-repressor. Blocking the interaction between ZEB1 and BRG1
induces expression of E-cadherin and downregulation of the mesenchymal marker
vimentin. ZEB1 and BRG1 colocalize in E-cadherin-negative cells from cancer lines
and in the stroma of normal colon. Colocalization of ZEB1 and BRG1 in epithelial 
cells is only found in those de-differentiated cells characterized by nuclear
beta-catenin staining at the invasive edge of the tumor. Our results identify
ZEB1/BRG1 as a new transcriptional mechanism regulating E-cadherin expression and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transdifferentiation that may be involved during the
initial stages of tumor invasion.

PMID: 20418909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 May;142(5):753-9. doi:
10.1016/j.otohns.2010.01.034.

The role of ZEB1 in the inflammation-induced promotion of EMT in HNSCC.

Dohadwala M(1), Wang G, Heinrich E, Luo J, Lau O, Shih H, Munaim Q, Lee G, Hong
L, Lai C, Abemayor E, Fishbein MC, Elashoff DA, Dubinett SM, St John MA.

Author information: 
(1)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the role of ZEB1 in the inflammation-induced promotion
of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC).
STUDY DESIGN: A molecular biology study. Real-time quantitative
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western blot analysis, 
and immunohistochemical staining of human HNSCC tissue sections were used to
determine how inflammation affects the transcriptional repressor, ZEB1.
SETTING: An academic hospital laboratory.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Relative ZEB1 RNA levels were determined by RT-PCR, and
protein expression was evaluated in situ by immunohistochemical staining of human
HNSCC tissue sections.
RESULTS: IL-1beta-treated HNSCC cell lines demonstrated a significant decrease in
E-cadherin mRNA and an increase in the mRNA expression of the transcriptional
repressor ZEB1. IL-1beta exposure led to enhanced ZEB1 binding at the chromatin
level, as determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays (ChIP). An inverse
relationship between ZEB1 and E-cadherin was demonstrated in situ by
immunohistochemical staining of human HNSCC tissue sections.
CONCLUSIONS: Our recent investigations indicate that inflammatory mediators are
potent regulators of EMT in HNSCC. This is the first report indicating the role
of ZEB1 in the inflammation-induced promotion of EMT in HNSCC. This newly defined
pathway for transcriptional regulation of E-cadherin in HNSCC has important
implications for targeted chemoprevention and therapy.

Copyright 2010 American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery
Foundation. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20416468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 May;9(5):1308-17. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0167. Epub 
2010 Apr 20.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and oncogenic Ras expression in resistance
to the protein kinase Cbeta inhibitor enzastaurin in colon cancer cells.

Serova M(1), Astorgues-Xerri L, Bieche I, Albert S, Vidaud M, Benhadji KA, Emami 
S, Vidaud D, Hammel P, Theou-Anton N, Gespach C, Faivre S, Raymond E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U728, RayLab, Beaujon University Hospital (AP-HP-Paris 7 Diderot),
Clichy, France.

Identifying molecular factors of sensitivity and resistance of cancer cells to
enzastaurin, a drug inhibiting protein kinase C (PKC) beta, remains a major
challenge to improve its clinical development. Investigating the cellular effects
of enzastaurin in a panel of 20 human cancer cell lines, we found that most cells
displaying oncogenic K-Ras mutations also display resistance to enzastaurin.
Wild-type (WT) K-Ras cancer cells displaying high sensitivity to enzastaurin also
expressed high mRNA levels of epithelial markers, such as E-cadherin (CDH1), and 
low mRNA expressions of mesenchymal markers, such as vimentin, N-cadherin (CDH2),
and other genes frequently expressed in mesenchymal transition such as ZEB1,
TWIST, SLUG, SNAIL, and TGFbeta. WT K-Ras enzastaurin-resistant cells also
expressed high levels of mesenchymal markers. Based on this observation, the
effects of enzastaurin were investigated in epithelial colon COLO205-S cells that
expressed WT Ras/Raf and its derived COLO205-R mesenchymal counterpart selected
for resistance to most PKC modulators and displaying oncogenic K-Ras (G13D/exon
2). In COLO205-S cells, inhibition of phosphorylated PKCbeta led to the
inactivation of AKT and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and was associated with
apoptosis without significant effect on cell cycle progression. In COLO205-R
cells, enzastaurin induced mainly necrosis at high concentrations. In COLO205-R
cells, a strong activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 possibly 
due to oncogenic K-Ras was predominantly associated with transcription of potent 
antiapoptotic genes, such as BCL2, GADD45B, and CDKN1A, as well as the multidrug 
resistance gene ABCB1. From this study, colon cancer cells undergoing apoptosis
under enzastaurin exposure seem to frequently express a WT Ras and an epithelial 
phenotype.

PMID: 20406951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 9;38(1):114-27. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.02.020.

ERK2 but not ERK1 induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation via DEF
motif-dependent signaling events.

Shin S(1), Dimitri CA, Yoon SO, Dowdle W, Blenis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 9;38(1):3-5.

Hyperactivation of Ras-ERK1/2 signaling is critical to the development of many
human malignancies, but little is known regarding the specific contribution of
ERK1 or ERK2 to oncogenic processes. We demonstrate that ERK2 but not ERK1
signaling is necessary for Ras-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation
(EMT). Further, ERK2 but not ERK1 overexpression is sufficient to induce EMT.
Many ERK1/2-interacting proteins contain amino acid motifs, e.g., DEF or
D-motifs, which regulate docking with ERK1/2. Remarkably, ERK2 signaling to DEF
motif-containing targets is required to induce EMT and correlates with increased 
migration, invasion, and survival. Importantly, the late-response gene product
Fra1 is necessary for Ras- and ERK2-induced EMT through upregulation of ZEB1/2
proteins. Thus, an apparent critical role for ERK2 DEF motif signaling during
tumorigenesis is the regulation of Fra1 and the subsequent induction of ZEB1/2,
suggesting a potential therapeutic target for Ras-regulated tumorigenesis.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854677
PMID: 20385094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Virol. 2010 Jun;84(12):6139-52. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02706-09. Epub 2010 Apr 7.

Either ZEB1 or ZEB2/SIP1 can play a central role in regulating the Epstein-Barr
virus latent-lytic switch in a cell-type-specific manner.

Ellis AL(1), Wang Z, Yu X, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706-1599, USA.

We previously reported that the cellular protein ZEB1 can repress expression of
the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) BZLF1 gene in transient transfection assays by
directly binding its promoter, Zp. We also reported that EBV containing a 2-bp
substitution mutation in the ZEB-binding ZV element of Zp spontaneously
reactivated out of latency into lytic replication at a higher frequency than did 
wild-type EBV. Here, using small interfering RNA (siRNA) and short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) technologies, we definitively show that ZEB1 is, indeed, a key player in 
maintaining EBV latency in some epithelial and B-lymphocytic cell lines. However,
in other EBV-positive epithelial and B-cell lines, another zinc finger
E-box-binding protein, ZEB2/SIP1, is the key player. Both ZEB1 and ZEB2 can bind 
Zp via the ZV element. In EBV-positive cells containing only ZEB1, knockdown of
ZEB1 led to viral reactivation out of latency, with synthesis of EBV
immediate-early and early lytic gene products. However, in EBV-positive cells
containing both ZEBs, ZEB2, not ZEB1, was the primary ZEB family member bound to 
Zp. Knockdown of ZEB2, but not ZEB1, led to EBV lytic reactivation. Thus, we
conclude that either ZEB1 or ZEB2 can play a central role in the maintenance of
EBV latency, doing so in a cell-type-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC2876653
PMID: 20375168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2010 Feb;16(2):137-41.

[Comparison of transcription factors repressing epithelial phenotype in two
different prostate cancer EMT models and its significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu KJ(1), Zeng J, Zhu GD, Zhang D, Xue Y, Chen YL, Wang XY, He DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Medical School of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China. yidaiwujin@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To screen and compare the specific transcription factors that repress 
the epithelial phenotype in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in two
different human prostate cancer models LNCaP/HIF1alpha and ARCaP.
METHODS: We established two different prostate cancer EMT models, LNCaP/HIF1alpha
and ARCaP, cultured LNCaP, LNCaP/HIF1alpha, IF11 and IA8 cells in vitro, and
detected the five transcription factors Snail, Slug, ZEB1, SIP1 and Twist1 in
these cells by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Different levels of Snail, Slug, ZEB1, SIP1 and Twist1 were detected in 
both LNCaP and LNCaP/HIF1alpha cells, with significant differences only in the
expressions of Slug and Twist1 between the two cells. The expression of Slug was 
increased, but that of Twist1 decreased in the LNCaP/HIF1alpha cells. All the
five transcription factors but Twist1 were expressed in both the IF11 and IA8
cells, but only the express- sions of ZEB1 and Slug were increased significantly 
in the IA8 cells.
CONCLUSION: There are different mechanisms underlying transcriptional regulation 
in different prostate cancer EMT models. Slug may be one of the key transcription
factors involved in the HIF1alpha-induced EMT of LNCaP cells, while ZEB1 and Slug
may play an important role in repressing the epithelial phenotype of the ARCaP
model.

PMID: 20369697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cancer Lett. 2010 Sep 28;295(2):214-28. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.03.003. Epub
2010 Mar 29.

NF-kappaB promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration and invasion of
pancreatic carcinoma cells.

Maier HJ(1), Schmidt-Strassburger U, Huber MA, Wiedemann EM, Beug H, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Ulm, Germany.

The transcription factor NF-kappaB is constitutively active in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Here we explore the contribution of NF-kappaB to the malignant
phenotype of pancreatic cancer cells in addition to its anti-apoptotic role.
Block of NF-kappaB signalling by non-destructible IkappaBalpha rendered cells
resistant to TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In
contrast, NF-kappaB activation by TNF-alpha or expression of constitutively
active IKK2 induced an EMT-phenotype with up-regulation of vimentin and ZEB1, and
down-regulation of E-cadherin. EMT could also be induced in cells with defective 
TGF-beta signalling. Functional assays demonstrated reduced or strongly enhanced 
migration and invasion upon NF-kappaB inhibition or activation, respectively.

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20350779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Neoplasia. 2010 Mar;12(3):224-34.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma inhibits transformed growth of
non-small cell lung cancer cells through selective suppression of Snail.

Choudhary R(1), Li H, Winn RA, Sorenson AL, Weiser-Evans MC, Nemenoff RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado-Denver, 12700 E 19th Ave., Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Work from our laboratory and others has demonstrated that activation of the
nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma)
inhibits transformed growth of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines in
vitro and in vivo. We have demonstrated that activation of PPARgamma promotes
epithelial differentiation of NSCLC by increasing expression of E-cadherin, as
well as inhibiting expression of COX-2 and nuclear factor-kappaB. The Snail
family of transcription factors, which includes Snail (Snail1), Slug (Snail2),
and ZEB1, is an important regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, as well
as cell survival. The goal of this study was to determine whether the biological 
responses to rosiglitazone, a member of the thiazolidinedione family of PPARgamma
activators, are mediated through the regulation of Snail family members. Our
results indicate that, in two independent NSCLC cell lines, rosiglitazone
specifically decreased expression of Snail, with no significant effect on either 
Slug or ZEB1. Suppression of Snail using short hairpin RNA silencing mimicked the
effects of PPARgamma activation, in inhibiting anchorage-independent growth,
promoting acinar formation in three-dimensional culture, and inhibiting
invasiveness. This was associated with the increased expression of E-cadherin and
decreased expression of COX-2 and matrix metaloproteinases. Conversely,
overexpression of Snail blocked the biological responses to rosiglitazone,
increasing anchorage-independent growth, invasiveness, and promoting
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. The suppression of Snail expression by
rosiglitazone seemed to be independent of GSK-3 signaling but was rather mediated
through suppression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase activity. These
findings suggest that selective regulation of Snail may be critical in mediating 
the antitumorigenic effects of PPARgamma activators.

PMCID: PMC2838440
PMID: 20234816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2010 Mar;27(3):161-72. doi: 10.1007/s10585-010-9315-2. Epub 
2010 Mar 7.

Mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition determinants as characteristics of ovarian
carcinoma effusions.

Elloul S(1), Vaksman O, Stavnes HT, Trope CG, Davidson B, Reich R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

The present study investigated the intracellular regulation of E-cadherin in
ovarian carcinoma. E-cadherin expression and regulation by Snail and Pak1 were
studied in ES-2 and OVCAR-3 ovarian cancer cells in vitro. Twist1, Zeb1 and
Vimentin mRNA expression and HIF-1alpha protein expression were analyzed in 80
and 189 clinical specimens, respectively. OVCAR-3 cells incubated with an
anti-E-cadherin antibody formed smaller and looser spheroids compared to
controls. Snail silencing using Small Hairpin RNA in ES-2 cells reduced invasion 
and MMP-2 activity, with unaltered cellular morphology. Using dominant negative
(DN) and constitutively active (CA) Pak1 constructs, we found that DN Pak1 ES-2
and OVCAR-3 clones had reduced attachment to matrix proteins, invasion and MMP-2 
activity compared to CA and wild-type cells. DN Pak1 ES-2 cells also bound less
to LP9 mesothelial cells. DN Pak1 OVCAR-3 cells had lower Vimentin levels. Snail 
expression was lower in cultured effusions compared to primary carcinomas, and
was cytoplasmic rather than nuclear. Twist1 (P < 0.001), Zeb1 (P = 0.003) and
Vimentin (P = 0.03) mRNA expression was significantly higher in solid metastases 
compared to primary carcinomas and effusions. HIF-1alpha protein expression was
lower in effusions compared to primary carcinomas and solid metastases (P =
0.033). Our data suggest that the previously reported E-cadherin re-expression in
ovarian carcinoma effusions is regulated by Pak1. The transient nature of
E-cadherin expression during ovarian carcinoma progression is probably the result
of partial epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the reverse process of 
mesenchymal-to-epithelial-like transition (MET). Expression of the EMT-related
molecules Twist, Zeb1, Vimentin and HIF-1alpha is anatomic site-dependent in
ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 20213325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jul;51(7):3372-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4321. Epub
2010 Mar 5.

Taz-tead1 links cell-cell contact to zeb1 expression, proliferation, and
dedifferentiation in retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Liu Y(1), Xin Y, Ye F, Wang W, Lu Q, Kaplan HJ, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

PURPOSE. The Hippo signaling pathway imposes the cell contact inhibition that
establishes organ size and tissue topology from Drosophila to mammals. This
pathway regulates activity of the Yap and Taz transcription factors, which link
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to cell proliferation. Here, the authors 
provide evidence that Taz and its coactivator, Tead1, regulate expression of the 
EMT transcription factor Zeb1 to control RPE cell proliferation and
differentiation. METHODS. Real-time PCR was used to examine mRNA expression
during RPE dedifferentiation in primary cultures of RPE cells and after knockdown
of Yap and Taz by lentivirus shRNA. Immunofluorescence was used to follow
subcellular localization of proteins in cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was 
used to detect Taz at the Zeb1 promoter in vivo. RESULTS. Zeb1 is overexpressed
during RPE dedifferentiation, leading to cell proliferation, EMT, and repression 
of the RPE specification transcription factor gene Mitf. Taz-TEAD1 translocation 
to the nucleus coincides with loss of cell-cell contact and with onset of Zeb1
expression in the nucleus. shRNA knockdown of Taz prevented the overexpression of
Zeb1 and, in turn, prevented proliferation, repression of Mitf and Mitf target
genes, and EMT when RPE cells were placed in primary culture. Taz binds to the
Zeb1 promoter in vivo, suggesting that it directly induces Zeb1 transcription.
CONCLUSIONS. These results provide evidence of a molecular mechanism linking
cell-cell contact to cell proliferation and dedifferentiation in RPE cells.

PMCID: PMC2904003
PMID: 20207963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Lung Cancer. 2010 Nov;70(2):136-45. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.02.004. Epub 2010
Mar 5.

Involvement of LKB1 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of human lung
cancer cells.

Roy BC(1), Kohno T, Iwakawa R, Moriguchi T, Kiyono T, Morishita K,
Sanchez-Cespedes M, Akiyama T, Yokota J.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1 Tsukiji
5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical phenotypic alteration of
cancer cells that triggers invasion and metastasis. Lung cancer cells often show 
mesenchymal phenotypes; however, a causative genetic alteration for the induction
of EMT in lung cancer cells remains unknown. Recent studies have shown that the
LKB1 gene is mutated in up to one-third of lung adenocarcinomas. Therefore, to
pursue the possible involvement of LKB1 inactivation in the induction of EMT in
lung carcinogenesis, we generated immortalized lung epithelial cells and lung
adenocarcinoma cells with stable or transient LKB1 knockdown. LKB1 knockdown
increased cell motility and invasiveness, and induced the expression of several
mesenchymal marker proteins accompanied by the expression of ZEB1, a
transcriptional repressor for E-cadherin and an EMT inducer. In agreement with
the recent findings, expression of miR-200a/c was inversely correlated with that 
of ZEB1 in LKB1 knockdown clones with mesenchymal phenotype. Furthermore,
transient knockdown of LKB1 induced ZEB1 mRNA and increased cell motility, and
this motility was suppressed by ZEB1 repression. These results strongly indicate 
that LKB1 inactivation triggers EMT in lung cancer cells through the induction of
ZEB1.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20207041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):541-50. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091578.

ZEB1 and CtBP form a repressive complex at a distal promoter element of the BCL6 
locus.

Papadopoulou V(1), Postigo A, Sánchez-Tilló E, Porter AC, Wagner SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, UK.

BCL6 is essential for normal antibody responses and is highly expressed in
germinal centre B-cells. Constitutive expression due to chromosomal
translocations or mutations of cis-acting regulatory elements contributes to
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. BCL6 expression is therefore tightly regulated in 
a lineage- and developmental-stage-specific manner, and disruption of normal
controls can contribute to lymphomagenesis. In order to discover potential
cis-acting control regions we carried out DNase I-hypersensitive site mapping.
Gel-shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation of the core region of a
hypersensitive site 4.4 kb upstream of BCL6 transcription initiation (HSS-4.4)
showed an E-box element-binding ZEB1 (zinc finger E-boxbinding homeobox 1) and
the co-repressor CtBP (C-terminal binding protein). As compared with peripheral
blood B-cells, ZEB1, a two-handed zinc finger transcriptional repressor, is
expressed at relatively low levels in germinal centre cells, whereas BCL6 has the
opposite pattern of expression. Transfection of ZEB1 cDNA caused a reduction in
BCL6 expression and a mutated ZEB1, incapable of binding CtBP, lacked this
effect. siRNA (small interfering RNA)-mediated knockdown of ZEB1 or CtBP produced
an increase in BCL6 mRNA. We propose that HSS-4.4 is a distal promoter element
binding a repressive complex consisting of ZEB1 and CtBP. CtBP is ubiquitously
expressed and the results of the present study suggest that regulation of ZEB1 is
required for control of BCL6 expression.

PMID: 20175752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cell Cycle. 2010 Mar 1;9(5):886-91. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

ZEB proteins link cell motility with cell cycle control and cell survival in
cancer.

Browne G(1), Sayan AE, Tulchinsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, UK.

Epithelial mesenchymal transitions (EMT), the generation of motile mesenchymal
cells from epithelial sheets, are differentiation programs which take place at
several critical steps of embryonic development and in metastatic cancer. Recent 
data have shown that the transcription factors which are master regulators of EMT
also regulate cell cycle progression, apoptosis and senescence. In light of these
new observations, the role of these factors in human cancer may be broader than
previously anticipated. Here we review recent literature on non-EMT functions of 
EMT-controlling transcription factors. We will mainly focus on transcription
factors belonging to the ZEB family, but some important results obtained by
investigators studying other key EMT regulators, Snail and Twist are also
discussed.

PMID: 20160487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cell Cycle. 2010 Mar 1;9(5):897-900. Epub 2010 Mar 13.

Tumor initiation via loss of cell contact inhibition versus Ras mutation: do all 
roads lead to EMT?

Liu Y(1), Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Targets Program, James Graham Brown Cancer Center and Department of 
Ophthalmology, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY,
USA.

Many tumors have been found to contain a subset of cells referred to as cancer
stem cells. As opposed to the remainder of the tumor, these cells are
undifferentiated-they do not express markers of differentiation and they can
re-express stem cell specification genes. The cells can divide asymmetrically to 
yield differentiated cells as well as cells comprising the original heterogeneous
population of the tumor while maintaining their number. Because cancer stem cells
display some properties of stem cells, it has been presumed that the presence of 
such cells in tumors reflects a stem cell origin for cancer. However, recent
studies suggest that cancer can originate with outgrowth of differentiated
somatic cells, and that cells with properties of cancer stem cells can be
generated as tumors progress. Appearance of such cells may be linked to
reprogramming of differentiated somatic cells to a stem cell-like phenotype by
overexpression of transcription factors involved in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). We discuss recent studies from our group and other laboratories
linking cell outgrowth in tumors to inhibition of the RB1 pathway, loss of cell
contact inhibition and generation of undifferentiated cancer stem-like cells from
somatic cells. And, we compare this pathway to that arising with introduction of 
mutant Ras in cells.

PMID: 20160473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10870-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.004200. Epub 2010 
Feb 5.

Ubiquitin ligase cullin 7 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human
choriocarcinoma cells.

Fu J(1), Lv X, Lin H, Wu L, Wang R, Zhou Z, Zhang B, Wang YL, Tsang BK, Zhu C,
Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. wanghm@ioz.ac.cn

Germ line mutations of the ubiquitin ligase cullin 7 (CUL7) are linked to 3-M
syndrome and Yakuts short stature syndrome, both of which are characterized by
pre- and post-natal growth retardation. CUL7 knock-out mice show placental and
embryonic defects similar to intrauterine growth retardation, suggesting a role
of CUL7 in placentation. CUL7 was found in this study to be highly expressed in
first trimester invasive human placental villi as well as in HTR8/SVneo and
B6Tert cells, two cell lines derived from human first trimester trophoblast
cells. However, CUL7 levels in term trophoblast cells or JEG-3 cells, which are
derived from human choriocarcinoma but exhibit weak invasion capacity, were low
or undetectable. Forced expression of CUL7 in JEG-3 cells induced cell
morphological changes characteristic of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, which 
was accompanied by a complete loss of the epithelial markers E-cadherin and
P-cadherin and a significant elevation of mesenchymal markers Vimentin and
N-cadherin. JEG-3 cells expressing CUL7 exhibited enhanced cell migration and
invasion. Conversely, CUL7-specific RNA interference in HTR8/SVneo cells resulted
in increased E-cadherin expression and reduced cell migration and invasion.
Furthermore, CUL7 expression down-regulated E-cadherin mRNA expression by
up-regulating ZEB1 and Slug, two transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin.
Finally, CUL7-induced loss of E-cadherin expression was partially reversed by
treatment of CUL7-expressing cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132. These
results suggest that the CUL7 E3 ligase is a key regulator in trophoblast cell
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and placental development.

PMCID: PMC2856293
PMID: 20139075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Cell Sci. 2010 Feb 15;123(Pt 4):606-18. doi: 10.1242/jcs.056812. Epub 2010 Jan 
26.

A putative role for microRNA-205 in mammary epithelial cell progenitors.

Greene SB(1), Gunaratne PH, Hammond SM, Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

In an effort to understand the potential role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
mammary-gland stem or progenitor cells, miRNA microarrays were performed on
subpopulations of the mouse mammary epithelial cell (MEC) line COMMA-DbetaGeo.
This cell line contains a heterogeneous subpopulation of progenitors
characterized by the expression of stem cell antigen 1 (Sca-1; encoded by Ly6a). 
Microarray analysis indicated that the Sca-1 subpopulations have distinct miRNA
expression profiles. Functional studies were performed on miR-205, which was
highly expressed in the Sca-1-positive (Sca-1(+)) cells. When miR-205 was
overexpressed in vitro, the COMMA-DbetaGeo cells underwent several significant
morphological and molecular changes. miR-205 overexpression led to an expansion
of the progenitor-cell population, decreased cell size and increased cellular
proliferation. In addition, the colony-forming potential of the two Sca-1
subpopulations was increased. Target prediction for miR-205 indicated that it
might regulate the expression of the tumor-suppressor protein PTEN.
Overexpression studies using reporter constructs confirmed that PTEN expression
is regulated by miR-205. In addition to PTEN, several other putative and
previously validated miR-205 targets were identified by microarray analysis,
including the previously reported miR-205 targets ZEB1 and ZEB2. Additionally, in
normal mouse MECs, high expression of miR-205 was observed in stem-cell-enriched 
cell populations isolated by FACS using established cell-surface markers.

PMCID: PMC2818197
PMID: 20103531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Jan 8;6(1):4-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.12.006.

Regulating cancer stem cells the miR way.

Peter ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. mpeter@uchicago.edu

A recent study in Nature Cell Biology, Wellner et al. (2009) identifies ZEB1, a
known promoter of tumor invasion, as a negative regulator of miRNA clusters that 
target stem cell factors. These findings provide new insight into the network of 
transcription factors and miRNAs that regulate cancer stem cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20085735  [PubMed]


400. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Oct;38(10):715-7.

[Mechanism of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and the relationship with
tumor metastasis].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma YH, Lu ZH, Chen J.

PMID: 20078984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Mar;21(3):438-47. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2009050530. Epub 2010
Jan 7.

Loss of MicroRNA-192 promotes fibrogenesis in diabetic nephropathy.

Krupa A(1), Jenkins R, Luo DD, Lewis A, Phillips A, Fraser D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nephrology, Cardiff University, Heath Park Campus, Cardiff, UK.

The role of microRNAs (miRs), which are endogenous RNA oligonucleotides that
regulate gene expression, in diabetic nephropathy is unknown. Here, we performed 
expression profiling of cultured proximal tubular cells (PTCs) under high-glucose
and control conditions. We identified expression of 103 of 328 microRNAs but did 
not observe glucose-induced changes in expression. Next, we performed miR
expression profiling in pooled RNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue 
from renal biopsies. We studied three groups of patients with established
diabetic nephropathy and detected 103 of 365 miRs. Two miRs differed by more than
two-fold between progressors and nonprogressors, and 12 miRs differed between
late presenters and other biopsies. We noted the greatest change in miR-192
expression, which was significantly lower in late presenters. Furthermore, in
individual biopsies, low expression of miR-192 correlated with tubulointerstitial
fibrosis and low estimated GFR. In vitro, treatment of PTCs with TGF-beta1
decreased miR-192 expression. Overexpression of miR-192 suppressed expression of 
the E-Box repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2, thereby opposing TGF-beta-mediated
downregulation of E-cadherin. In summary, loss of miR-192 expression associates
with increased fibrosis and decreased estimated GFR in diabetic nephropathy in
vivo, perhaps by enhancing TGF-beta-mediated downregulation of E-cadherin in
PTCs.

PMCID: PMC2831862
PMID: 20056746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Jan;9(1):1-16. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0321. Epub
2010 Jan 6.

Multifactorial regulation of E-cadherin expression: an integrative study.

Reinhold WC(1), Reimers MA, Lorenzi P, Ho J, Shankavaram UT, Ziegler MS, Bussey
KJ, Nishizuka S, Ikediobi O, Pommier YG, Weinstein JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
wcr@mail.nih.gov

E-cadherin (E-cad) is an adhesion molecule associated with tumor invasion and
metastasis. Its down-regulation is associated with poor prognosis for many
epithelial tumor types. We have profiled E-cad in the NCI-60 cancer cell lines at
the DNA, RNA, and protein levels using six different microarray platforms plus
bisulfite sequencing. Here we consider the effects on E-cad expression of eight
potential regulatory factors: E-cad promoter DNA methylation, the transcript
levels of six transcriptional repressors (SNAI1, SNAI2, TCF3, TCF8, TWIST1, and
ZFHX1B), and E-cad DNA copy number. Combined bioinformatic and pharmacological
analyses indicate the following ranking of influence on E-cad expression: (1)
E-cad promoter methylation appears predominant, is strongly correlated with E-cad
expression, and shows a 20% to 30% threshold above which E-cad expression is
silenced; (2) TCF8 expression levels correlate with (-0.62) and predict (P <
0.00001) E-cad expression; (3) SNAI2 and ZFHX1B expression levels correlate
positively with each other (+0.83) and also correlate with (-0.32 and -0.30,
respectively) and predict (P = 0.03 and 0.01, respectively) E-cad expression; (4)
TWIST1 correlates with (-0.34) but does not predict E-cad expression; and (5)
SNAI1 expression, TCF3 expression, and E-cad DNA copy number do not correlate
with or predict E-cad expression. Predictions of E-cad regulation based on the
above factors were tested and verified by demethylation studies using
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment; siRNA knock-down of TCF8, SNAI2, or ZFHX1B
expression; and combined treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and TCF8 siRNA.
Finally, levels of cellular E-cad expression are associated with levels of
cell-cell adhesion and response to drug treatment.

PMCID: PMC2821037
PMID: 20053763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Oncol. 2010;2010:821717. doi: 10.1155/2010/821717. Epub 2009 Dec 15.

Loss of miR-200c: A Marker of Aggressiveness and Chemoresistance in Female
Reproductive Cancers.

Cochrane DR(1), Howe EN, Spoelstra NS, Richer JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Denver School of Medicine, University of Colorado,
Aurora CO, 80045, USA.

We focus on unique roles of miR-200c in breast, ovarian, and endometrial cancers.
Members of the miR-200 family target ZEB1, a transcription factor which represses
E-cadherin and other genes involved in polarity. We demonstrate that the double
negative feedback loop between miR-200c and ZEB1 is functional in some, but not
all cell lines. Restoration of miR-200c to aggressive cancer cells causes a
decrease in migration and invasion. These effects are independent of E-cadherin
status. Additionally, we observe that restoration of miR-200c to ovarian cancer
cells causes a decrease in adhesion to laminin. We have previously reported that 
reintroduction of miR-200c to aggressive cells that lack miR-200c expression
restores sensitivity to paclitaxel. We now prove that this ability is a result of
direct targeting of class III beta-tubulin (TUBB3). Introduction of a TUBB3
expression construct lacking the miR-200c target site into cells transfected with
miR-200c mimic results in no change in sensitivity to paclitaxel. Lastly, we
observe a decrease in proliferation in cells transfected with miR-200c mimic, and
cells where ZEB1 is knocked down stably, demonstrating that the ability of
miR-200c to enhance sensitivity to paclitaxel is not due to an increased
proliferation rate.

PMCID: PMC2798671
PMID: 20049172  [PubMed]


404. Yonsei Med J. 2009 Dec 31;50(6):818-24. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2009.50.6.818. Epub 2009
Dec 18.

Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is related to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in human colon cancers.

Jang TJ(1), Jeon KH, Jung KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dongguk University College of Medicine, Gyeongju,
Korea. taejung@mail.dongguk.ac.kr

PURPOSE: Down-regulation of E-cadherin is a hallmark of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT progression in cancer cells is
associated with the loss of certain epithelial markers and the acquisition of a
mesenchymal phenotype, as well as migratory activities. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
expression is associated with tumor invasion and metastasis in colon cancer. This
study investigated the relationship between E-cadherin and COX-2 in colon cancer 
cells and human colon tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Colon cancer cell lines and immunohistochemistry were
used.
RESULTS: E-cadherin expression was inversely related to the expressions of COX-2 
and Snail in colon cancer cells. Ectopic expression of COX-2 or Snail reduced
E-cadherin and induced a scattered, flattened phenotype with few intercellular
contacts in colon cancer cells. Treatment of cancer cells with phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate increased the expressions of COX-2 and Snail, decreased
15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase expression, and increased the cells'
motility. In addition, exposure to prostaglandin E(2) increased Snail expression 
and cell motility, and decreased E-cadherin expression. Membranous E-cadherin
expression was lower in adenomas and cancers than in the adjacent, non-neoplastic
epithelium. In contrast, the expressions of Snail and COX-2 were higher in
cancers than in normal tissues and adenomas. The expressions of COX-2 and Snail
increased in areas with abnormal E-cadherin expression. Moreover, COX-2
expression was related to higher tumor stages and was significantly higher in
nodal metastatic lesions than primary cancers.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that COX-2 may have a role in tumor metastasis
via EMT.

PMCID: PMC2796410
PMID: 20046424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 May;51(5):2466-75. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4677.
Epub 2009 Dec 30.

Molecular mechanism of proinflammatory cytokine-mediated squamous metaplasia in
human corneal epithelial cells.

Li S(1), Gallup M, Chen YT, McNamara NA.

Author information: 
(1)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0412, USA.

PURPOSE: The cornified envelope protein small proline-rich protein 1B (SPRR1B) is
a biomarker for squamous metaplasia. Proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and
IFN-gamma are potent inducers of ocular surface keratinization and SPRR1B
expression. Here the molecular mechanisms controlling SPRR1B gene expression in
response to IL-1beta and IFN-gamma are elucidated.
METHODS: A 3-kb fragment of the SPRR1B gene 5'-flanking region was amplified from
human chromosome 1, sequentially deleted, and cloned into a luciferase vector.
Constructs were transiently transfected into human corneal epithelial cells, and 
activity was assessed in response to IL-1beta, IFN-gamma, or basal medium.
Functional cis-elements responding to IL-1beta and IFN-gamma were characterized
by site-directed mutagenesis and gel mobility shift assay. Effects of
mitogen-activated protein kinases p38, ERK, and JNK were assessed using
inhibitors and dominant-negative mutants. Results were validated by real-time
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The first 620 bp of the SPRR1B 5'-flanking region regulated constitutive
expression and increased promoter activity in response to IL-1beta and IFN-gamma.
Corresponding cis-elements for IL-1beta and IFN-gamma were bound by cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB) and zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1),
respectively. Inhibition of p38 abolished the stimulatory effects of IL-1beta and
IFN-gamma on SPRR1B, whereas inhibition of JNK and ERK had no effect.
Dominant-negative mutants targeting p38alpha and p38beta2 blocked
cytokine-induced SPRR1B promoter activity and mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: SPRR1B is upregulated by the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and 
IFN-gamma via p38 MAPK-mediated signaling pathways that lead to the activation of
transcription factors CREB and ZEB1, respectively. These results identify key
intracellular signaling intermediates involved in the pathogenesis of
immune-mediated ocular surface squamous metaplasia.

PMCID: PMC2868474
PMID: 20042643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancers (Basel). 2010 Aug 18;2(3):1617-28. doi: 10.3390/cancers2031617.

ZEB1 in Pancreatic Cancer.

Wellner U(1), Brabletz T, Keck T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Hugstetter
Straße 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. tobias.keck@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the most malignant human neoplasias. On the molecular
level, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been demonstrated to
contribute to the malignant phenotype of pancreatic cancer cells. ZEB1 is a
transcriptional repressor that has been identified as an inducer of EMT. A
negative feedback loop between ZEB1 and microRNA-200c has been shown to regulate 
this EMT induction in various models. With respect to pancreatic cancer, primary 
effects of EMT comprise increased local and distant tumor cell dissemination.
Another recently described feature of the EMT is the acquisition of cancer stem
cell traits. For pancreatic cancer cells, antagonism between ZEB1 and
stemness-inhibiting micro-RNAs has been demonstrated to contribute to this
process, providing experimental support for the migrating cancer stem cell (MCSC)
hypothesis. ZEB1 has also been shown to be associated with drug resistance of
pancreatic cancer cells. This article reviews the biological functions of ZEB1
with a focus on pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3837326
PMID: 24281177  [PubMed]


407. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 24;4(12):e8460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008460.

The ZEB1 transcription factor is a novel repressor of adiposity in female mice.

Saykally JN(1), Dogan S, Cleary MP, Sanders MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Four genome-wide association studies mapped an "obesity" gene to
human chromosome 10p11-12. As the zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1)
transcription factor is encoded by the TCF8 gene located in that region, and as
it influences the differentiation of various mesodermal lineages, we hypothesized
that ZEB1 might also modulate adiposity. The goal of these studies was to test
that hypothesis in mice.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To ascertain whether fat accumulation affects
ZEB1 expression, female C57BL/6 mice were fed a regular chow diet (RCD) ad
libitum or a 25% calorie-restricted diet from 2.5 to 18.3 months of age. ZEB1
mRNA levels in parametrial fat were six to ten times higher in the obese mice. To
determine directly whether ZEB1 affects adiposity, wild type (WT) mice and mice
heterozygous for TCF8 (TCF8+/-) were fed an RCD or a high-fat diet (HFD) (60%
calories from fat). By two months of age on an HFD and three months on an RCD,
TCF8+/- mice were heavier than WT controls, which was attributed by Echo MRI to
increased fat mass (at three months on an HFD: 0.517+/-0.081 total fat/lean mass 
versus 0.313+/-0.036; at three months on an RCD: 0.175+/-0.013 versus
0.124+/-0.012). No differences were observed in food uptake or physical activity,
suggesting that the genotypes differ in some aspect of their metabolic activity. 
ZEB1 expression also increases during adipogenesis in cell culture.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: These results show for the first time that the ZEB1
transcription factor regulates the accumulation of adipose tissue. Furthermore,
they corroborate the genome-wide association studies that mapped an "obesity"
gene at chromosome 10p11-12.

PMCID: PMC2794530
PMID: 20041147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 Nov;8(21):2013-24.

A resource for analysis of microRNA expression and function in pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma cells.

Kent OA(1), Mullendore M, Wentzel EA, López-Romero P, Tan AC, Alvarez H, West K, 
Ochs MF, Hidalgo M, Arking DE, Maitra A, Mendell JT.

Author information: 
(1)The McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 21-24 nucleotide RNA molecules that regulate the
translation and stability of target messenger RNAs. Abnormal miRNA expression is 
a common feature of diverse cancers. Several previous studies have classified
miRNA expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), although no uniform 
pattern of miRNA dysregulation has emerged. To clarify these previous findings as
well as to set the stage for detailed functional analyses, we performed global
miRNA expression profiling of 21 human PDAC cell lines, the most extensive panel 
studied to date. Overall, 39 miRNAs were found to be dysregulated and have at
least two-fold or greater differential expression in PDAC cell lines compared to 
control nontransformed pancreatic ductal cell lines. Several of these miRNAs show
comparable dysregulation in first-passage patient derived xenografts. Initial
functional analyses demonstrate that enforced expression of miRNAs derived from
the miR-200 family and the miR-17-92 cluster, both of which are overexpressed in 
PDAC cell lines, enhances proliferation. In contrast, inhibition of the miR-200
family, the miR-17-92 cluster, or miR-191 diminishes anchorage independent
growth. Consistent with a known role for the miR-200 family in negatively
regulating an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), the abundance of these 
miRNAs correlated positively with E-cadherin expression and negatively with the
EMT-associated transcription factor and established miR-200 target ZEB1. Finally,
restituted expression of miR-34a, a miRNA whose expression is frequently lost in 
PDAC cell lines, abrogates growth, demonstrating that the anti-proliferative
activity of this miRNA is operative in PDAC. These results, and the widespread
availability of PDAC cell lines wherein the aforementioned data were generated,
provide a valuable resource for the pancreatic cancer research community and will
greatly facilitate functional studies essential for elucidating the consequences 
of miRNA dysregulation in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC2824894
PMID: 20037478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;86(1):45-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.001. Epub 2009 
Dec 31.

Missense mutations in TCF8 cause late-onset Fuchs corneal dystrophy and interact 
with FCD4 on chromosome 9p.

Riazuddin SA(1), Zaghloul NA, Al-Saif A, Davey L, Diplas BH, Meadows DN, Eghrari 
AO, Minear MA, Li YJ, Klintworth GK, Afshari N, Gregory SG, Gottsch JD, Katsanis 
N.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Fuchs corneal dystrophy (FCD) is a degenerative genetic disorder of the corneal
endothelium that represents one of the most common causes of corneal
transplantation in the United States. Despite its high prevalence (4% over the
age of 40), the underlying genetic basis of FCD is largely unknown. Here we
report missense mutations in TCF8, a transcription factor whose
haploinsufficiency causes posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD), in a
cohort of late-onset FCD patients. In contrast to PPCD-causing mutations, all of 
which are null, FCD-associated mutations encode rare missense changes suggested
to cause loss of function by an in vivo complementation assay. Importantly,
segregation of a recurring p.Q840P mutation in a large, multigenerational FCD
pedigree showed this allele to be sufficient but not necessary for pathogenesis. 
Execution of a genome-wide scan conditioned for the presence of the 840P allele
identified an additional late-onset FCD locus on chromosome 9p, whereas haplotype
analysis indicated that the presence of the TCF8 allele and the disease haplotype
on 9p leads to a severe FCD manifestation with poor prognosis. Our data suggest
that PPCD and FCD are allelic variants of the same disease continuum and that
genetic interaction between genes that cause corneal dystrophies can modulate the
expressivity of the phenotype.

2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2801746
PMID: 20036349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. BMC Cell Biol. 2009 Dec 21;10:94. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-10-94.

Complete reversal of epithelial to mesenchymal transition requires inhibition of 
both ZEB expression and the Rho pathway.

Das S(1), Becker BN, Hoffmann FM, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA. shreyasidas@wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) induced by Transforming
Growth Factor-beta (TGF-beta) is an important cellular event in organogenesis,
cancer, and organ fibrosis. The process to reverse EMT is not well established.
Our purpose is to define signaling pathways and transcription factors that
maintain the TGF-beta-induced mesenchymal state.
RESULTS: Inhibitors of five kinases implicated in EMT, TGF-beta Type I receptor
kinase (TbetaRI), p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK), MAP kinase
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase activator kinase (MEK1), c-Jun
NH-terminal kinase (JNK), and Rho kinase (ROCK), were evaluated for reversal of
the mesenchymal state induced in renal tubular epithelial cells. Single agents
did not fully reverse EMT as determined by cellular morphology and gene
expression. However, exposure to the TbetaRI inhibitor SB431542, combined with
the ROCK inhibitor Y27632, eliminated detectable actin stress fibers and
mesenchymal gene expression while restoring epithelial E-cadherin and
Kidney-specific cadherin (Ksp-cadherin) expression. A second combination, the
TbetaRI inhibitor SB431542 together with the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580, was
partially effective in reversing EMT. Furthermore, JNK inhibitor SP600125
inhibits the effectiveness of the TbetaRI inhibitor SB431542 to reverse EMT. To
explore the molecular basis underlying EMT reversal, we also targeted the
transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2/SIP1. Decreasing ZEB1 and ZEB2
expression in mouse mammary gland cells with shRNAs was sufficient to up-regulate
expression of epithelial proteins such as E-cadherin and to re-establish
epithelial features. However, complete restoration of cortical F-actin required
incubation with the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 in combination with ZEB1/2 knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that reversal of EMT requires re-establishing both
epithelial transcription and structural components by sustained and independent
signaling through TbetaRI and ROCK. These findings indicate that combination
small molecule therapy targeting multiple kinases may be necessary to reverse
disease conditions.

PMCID: PMC2806300
PMID: 20025777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Thorac Oncol. 2009 Dec;4(12):1455-65. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181bc9419.

Induction of E-cadherin in lung cancer and interaction with growth suppression by
histone deacetylase inhibition.

Kakihana M(1), Ohira T, Chan D, Webster RB, Kato H, Drabkin HA, Gemmill RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado at Denver and Health
Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Loss of E-cadherin confers a poor prognosis in lung cancer patients
and is associated with in vitro resistance to endothelial growth factor receptor 
inhibitors. Zinc finger E box-binding homeobox (ZEB)-1, the predominant
transcriptional suppressor of E-cadherin in lung tumor lines, recruits histone
deacetylases (HDACs) as co-repressors.
METHODS: NSCLC cell lines were treated with HDAC inhibitors and analyzed for
E-cadherin induction, growth inhibition and apoptosis. National Cancer
Institute-H157 cells expressing ectopic E-cadherin were tested for tumorigenicity
in murine xenografts.
RESULTS: We found that treatment with MS-275, compared to vorinostat (SAHA),
valproic acid or trichostatin A, was most effective in E-cadherin up-regulation
and persistence in non-small cell lung cancers. As with other tumor types and
HDAC inhibitors, MS-275 inhibited growth and induced apoptosis. Importantly,
blocking E-cadherin induction by short hairpin RNA resulted in less inhibition by
MS-275, implicating the epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype process as a
contributing factor. In contrast to H460 and H661, H157 cells were resistant to
E-cadherin up-regulation by HDAC inhibitors. However, E-cadherin was restored, in
a synergistic manner, by combined knockdown of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2. In addition, H157
cells stably transfected with E-cadherin were markedly attenuated in their tumor 
forming ability. Lastly, combining MS-275 with the microtubule stabilizing agent,
paclitaxel, or 17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin, a heat shock protein 90 
inhibitor, resulted in synergistic growth inhibition. Since MS-275 has no
reported activity against HDAC6, which regulates both microtubule and heat shock 
protein 90 functions, other mechanisms of synergy are anticipated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the role of ZEB proteins and HDAC inhibitors
in the pathogenesis and treatment of lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC2796578
PMID: 20009910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Feb;1802(2):301-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.12.002.
Epub 2009 Dec 16.

DeltaEF1 promotes breast cancer cell proliferation through down-regulating p21
expression.

Hu F(1), Wang C, Du J, Sun W, Yan J, Mi D, Zhang J, Qiao Y, Zhu T, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Nankai University, Tianjin, China.

Although the zinc finger-homeodomain transcription factor deltaEF1 is implied as 
a regulatory factor at the crossroad between proliferation and differentiation in
carcinogenesis, its potential effect in the regulation of cell cycle progression 
has not been well elucidated. In our present study, we provide novel finding
that, in breast cancer, the ectopic expression of deltaEF1 in MDA-MB-231 cells
significantly promoted cell proliferation by increasing the cell number in S
phase of the cell cycle. In contrast, deltaEF1 knockdown by RNA interference
exhibited an opposite effect, highlighting a potent role of deltaEF1 to promote
G1-S transition of breast cancer cells. Moreover, we demonstrated that deltaEF1
down-regulated p21 and concurrently up-regulated the expressions of CDK2 and CDK4
during this process. Further, deltaEF1 inhibited p21 transcription by recruiting 
to the E(2) box element on the p21 promoter. Depletion of endogenous deltaEF1 in 
MDA-MB-231 cells was sufficient to allow an inherent release of p21 expression,
thus resulting in the cell cycle arrest. In addition, the stimulatory effect of
deltaEF1 on cell proliferation through p21 regulation was supported by an inverse
correlation of deltaEF1 and p21 expressions observed in both breast cancer cell
lines and clinical tumor specimens. Taken together, these observations suggest a 
dual effect of deltaEF1 in promoting breast cancer cell proliferation, by
differentially regulating the cell cycle regulatory proteins.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20006705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Dec 10;10:408. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-408.

Exploring complex miRNA-mRNA interactions with Bayesian networks by
splitting-averaging strategy.

Liu B(1), Li J, Tsykin A, Liu L, Gaur AB, Goodall GJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer and Information Science, University of South Australia,
Adelaide, SA 5095, Australia. Bing.Liu@unisa.edu.au

BACKGROUND: microRNAs (miRNAs) regulate target gene expression by controlling
their mRNAs post-transcriptionally. Increasing evidence demonstrates that miRNAs 
play important roles in various biological processes. However, the functions and 
precise regulatory mechanisms of most miRNAs remain elusive. Current research
suggests that miRNA regulatory modules are complicated, including up-, down-, and
mix-regulation for different physiological conditions. Previous computational
approaches for discovering miRNA-mRNA interactions focus only on down-regulatory 
modules. In this work, we present a method to capture complex miRNA-mRNA
interactions including all regulatory types between miRNAs and mRNAs.
RESULTS: We present a method to capture complex miRNA-mRNA interactions using
Bayesian network structure learning with splitting-averaging strategy. It is
designed to explore all possible miRNA-mRNA interactions by integrating
miRNA-targeting information, expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs, and sample 
categories. We also present an analysis of data sets for epithelial and
mesenchymal transition (EMT). Our results show that the proposed method
identified all possible types of miRNA-mRNA interactions from the data. Many
interactions are of tremendous biological significance. Some discoveries have
been validated by previous research, for example, the miR-200 family negatively
regulates ZEB1 and ZEB2 for EMT. Some are consistent with the literature, such as
LOX has wide interactions with the miR-200 family members for EMT. Furthermore,
many novel interactions are statistically significant and worthy of validation in
the near future.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper presents a new method to explore the complex miRNA-mRNA
interactions for different physiological conditions using Bayesian network
structure learning with splitting-averaging strategy. The method makes use of
heterogeneous data including miRNA-targeting information, expression profiles of 
miRNAs and mRNAs, and sample categories. Results on EMT data sets show that the
proposed method uncovers many known miRNA targets as well as new potentially
promising miRNA-mRNA interactions. These interactions could not be achieved by
the normal Bayesian network structure learning.

PMCID: PMC2797807
PMID: 20003267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Exp Dermatol. 2010 Aug;19(8):e136-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.01017.x.

Decreased expression of neurofibromin contributes to epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in neurofibromatosis type 1.

Arima Y(1), Hayashi H, Kamata K, Goto TM, Sasaki M, Kuramochi A, Saya H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, School
of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

Plexiform and/or dermal neurofibromas are nerve sheath tumors of the peripheral
nervous system that are usually present in individuals with neurofibromatosis
type 1 (NF1). Neurofibromas arise from Schwann cells with biallelic inactivation 
of NF1, the gene that encodes neurofibromin. This protein is responsible for
regulation of the Ras-mediated pathway, which has been shown to play a crucial
role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT is a biological process
that occurs during embryogenesis and wound healing and is involved in
pathological processes such as organ fibrosis and cancer metastasis. However, the
relationship between neurofibromin and EMT has not been elucidated. We
investigated whether the EMT-related signaling pathway was upregulated in
NF1-associated neurofibromas and Schwann cells by assessing the expression levels
of the EMT-related transcription factors Snail, Slug, Twist, ZEB1 and ZEB2.
Immunohistochemical studies and quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction revealed an increase in the expression levels of EMT-related
transcription factors in neurofibroma specimens and NF1-derived Schwann cells
(sNF96.2). In addition, the silencing of NF1 by siRNA induced the expression of
EMT-related transcription factors in normal human Schwann cells and in
epithelial-like breast cancer cells. Our findings suggest that the loss of
neurofibromin activated the EMT-related signaling pathway and that the excessive 
mesenchymal reaction may play a key role in the development of NF1-associated
neurofibromas.

PMID: 20002172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Vis. 2009 Dec 3;15:2544-53.

Phenotypic characterisation and ZEB1 mutational analysis in posterior
polymorphous corneal dystrophy in a New Zealand population.

Vincent AL(1), Niederer RL, Richards A, Karolyi B, Patel DV, McGhee CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, New Zealand National Eye Centre, Faculty of
Medical and Health Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
a.vincent@auckland.ac.nz

PURPOSE: Posterior Polymorphous Dystrophy (PPCD) is a genetically heterogeneous
corneal dystrophy, with linkage to three different chromosomal loci, with several
genes in these loci being implicated. The role of both VSX1 and COL8A2 in PPCD
remains controversial but recent work suggests that mutations in the
transcription factor gene ZEB1/TCF8 account for disease in up to 30% of subjects,
with a significant association with connective tissue abnormalities. This study
aimed to determine the phenotype and contribution of ZEB1 mutations in a New
Zealand PPCD population
METHODS: Following informed consent, 11 probands with PPCD underwent extensive
clinical characterization; including a questionnaire to determine birth history, 
general health, and the incidence of connective tissue abnormalities, slit lamp
examination, photography and in vivo confocal microscopy. Family members were
recruited where available. Biological specimens underwent mutational analysis of 
all nine coding exons of ZEB1.
RESULTS: ZEB1 mutational analysis identified one mutation in the 11 probands
(9.1%), a novel mutation in the initiating methionine of exon 1, c.1A-->G that
results in the protein change p.Met1Val, with resultant aberrant initiation of
translation. This mutation segregated with disease in the family, and was not
present in 100 control chromosomes. No other ZEB1 mutations were observed in this
cohort.
CONCLUSION: Recent studies suggest that ZEB1 mutations may account for PPCD in 18
to 30% of cases, with the majority of the mutations in exons 5 and 7. Clinical
and molecular analyses in this New Zealand cohort show a much lower incidence of 
ZEB1 sequence change, confirming the genetic heterogeneity of PPCD. We also
report identification of a novel mutation in the initiating methionine that
removes the Kozak sequence, thereby altering the site of initiation translation.

PMCID: PMC2788618
PMID: 19997581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 15;69(24):9192-201. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1257.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and ovarian tumor progression induced by
tissue transglutaminase.

Shao M(1), Cao L, Shen C, Satpathy M, Chelladurai B, Bigsby RM, Nakshatri H,
Matei D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA.

Tissue transglutaminase (TG2), an enzyme that catalyzes Ca(2+)-dependent
aggregation and polymerization of proteins, is overexpressed in ovarian cancer
cells and tumors. We previously reported that TG2 facilitates tumor dissemination
using an i.p. xenograft model. Here we show that TG2 modulates
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), contributing to increased ovarian
cancer cell invasiveness and tumor metastasis. By using stable knockdown and
overexpression in epithelial ovarian cancer cells, we show that TG2 induces a
mesenchymal phenotype, characterized by cadherin switch and invasive behavior in 
a Matrigel matrix. This is mediated at the transcriptional level by altering the 
expression levels and function of several transcriptional repressors, including
Zeb1. One mechanism through which TG2 induces Zeb1 is by activating the nuclear
factor-kappaB complex. The effects of TG2 on ovarian cancer cell phenotype and
invasiveness translate into increased tumor formation and metastasis in vivo, as 
assessed by an orthotopic ovarian xenograft model. Highly expressed in ovarian
tumors, TG2 promotes EMT and enhances ovarian tumor metastasis by activating
oncogenic signaling.

PMID: 19951993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;11(12):1487-95. doi: 10.1038/ncb1998. Epub 2009 Nov 22.

The EMT-activator ZEB1 promotes tumorigenicity by repressing stemness-inhibiting 
microRNAs.

Wellner U(1), Schubert J, Burk UC, Schmalhofer O, Zhu F, Sonntag A, Waldvogel B, 
Vannier C, Darling D, zur Hausen A, Brunton VG, Morton J, Sansom O, Schüler J,
Stemmler MP, Herzberger C, Hopt U, Keck T, Brabletz S, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg,
Germany.

Invasion and metastasis of carcinomas is promoted by the activation of the
embryonic 'epithelial to mesenchymal transition' (EMT) program, which triggers
cellular mobility and subsequent dissemination of tumour cells. We recently
showed that the EMT-activator ZEB1 (zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1) is a
crucial promoter of metastasis and demonstrated that ZEB1 inhibits expression of 
the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family, whose members are strong inducers of
epithelial differentiation. Here, we report that ZEB1 not only promotes tumour
cell dissemination, but is also necessary for the tumour-initiating capacity of
pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells. We show that ZEB1 represses expression of
stemness-inhibiting miR-203 and that candidate targets of miR-200 family members 
are also stem cell factors, such as Sox2 and Klf4. Moreover, miR-200c, miR-203
and miR-183 cooperate to suppress expression of stem cell factors in cancer cells
and mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells, as demonstrated for the polycomb repressor
Bmi1. We propose that ZEB1 links EMT-activation and stemness-maintenance by
suppressing stemness-inhibiting microRNAs (miRNAs) and thereby is a promoter of
mobile, migrating cancer stem cells. Thus, targeting the ZEB1-miR-200 feedback
loop might form the basis of a promising treatment for fatal tumours, such as
pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 19935649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Aug;123(1):139-47. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0623-7. 
Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Reciprocal regulation of ZEB1 and AR in triple negative breast cancer cells.

Graham TR(1), Yacoub R, Taliaferro-Smith L, Osunkoya AO, Odero-Marah VA, Liu T,
Kimbro KS, Sharma D, O'Regan RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University School of Medicine, 1701 Uppergate Drive, WCI Building C, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.

Zinc-finger enhancer binding protein (ZEB1) is a transcription factor involved in
the progression of cancer primarily through promoting epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT). ZEB1 represses the expression of E-cadherin by binding to E-box
sequences in the promoter, thus decreasing epithelial differentiation. We show
that ZEB1 and androgen receptor (AR) cross-talk in triple negative breast cancer 
cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrates that ZEB1 binds
directly to the E-box located in the AR promoter. ZEB1 suppression by stably
transfecting shRNA in a triple negative breast cancer cell line resulted in a
decrease of AR mRNA, protein, and AR downstream targets. ZEB1 knockdown in triple
negative breast cancer cells sensitized the cells to bicalutamide by reducing
migration compared to the control cells. Conversely, blockade of AR signaling
with bicalutamide resulted in a suppression of ZEB1 protein expression in two
triple negative breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, using a breast cancer
tissue microarray, a majority of triple negative breast cancers exhibit positive 
staining for both ZEB1 and AR. Taken together, these results indicate that ZEB1
and AR regulate each other to promote cell migration in triple negative breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4100622
PMID: 19921427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Am J Hypertens. 2010 Jan;23(1):78-84. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2009.208. Epub 2009 Nov
12.

Intrarenal expression of miRNAs in patients with hypertensive nephrosclerosis.

Wang G(1), Kwan BC, Lai FM, Choi PC, Chow KM, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding, single-stranded RNA molecules that
play important roles in a number of physiological and pathological processes.
Previous studies showed that miRNAs targeting transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2
may repress epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
METHODS: We studied 34 consecutive patients with biopsy-proven hypertensive
nephrosclerosis. Intrarenal expression of miR-200 family, miR-205, and miR-192
were determined. We also studied normal renal tissue from 20 patients with
nephrectomy for kidney cancer as controls.
RESULTS: The level of intrarenal of miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-141, miR-429,
miR-205, and miR-192 were significantly higher in patients with hypertensive
nephrosclerosis than controls. Proteinuria correlated with intrarenal expression 
of miR-200a (r = 0.594, P < 0.001), miR-200b (r = 0.395, P = 0.004), miR-141 (r =
0.377, P = 0.007), miR-429 (r = 0.346, P = 0.013), miR-205 (r = 0.636, P <
0.001), and miR-192 (r = 0.306, P = 0.029). Estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR) correlated with intrarenal expression of miR-200a (r = -0.374, P = 0.007)
and miR-205 (r = -0.400, P = 0.005). Intrarenal expression of ZEB1 inversely
correlated with intrarenal expression of miR-429, whereas expression of ZEB2
inversely correlated with miR-200a, miR-200b, and miR-429.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that intrarenal expression of miR-200a, miR-200b,
miR-141, miR-429, miR-205, and miR-192 were increased in hypertensive
nephrosclerosis, and the degree of upregulation correlated with disease severity.
The results suggested that these miRNA species may play important roles in the
pathogenesis of hypertensive nephrosclerosis.

PMID: 19910931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Lab Invest. 2010 Jan;90(1):98-103. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2009.118. Epub 2009 Nov
9.

Intrarenal expression of microRNAs in patients with IgA nephropathy.

Wang G(1), Kwan BC, Lai FM, Choi PC, Chow KM, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding, single-stranded RNA molecules that have
important roles in a number of physiological and pathological processes. Previous
studies have proved that miRNAs targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2 may repress
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. In this work, we studied the intrarenal
expression of miR-200 family, miR-205 and miR-192 in patients with immunoglobulin
A (IgA) nephropathy. We studied 43 patients with biopsy-proven IgA nephropathy
(IgA group). The intrarenal expression of miRNAs was quantified and compared with
that of 15 patients with noninflammatory glomerulosclerosis (GS group) and 20
patients with nephrectomy for kidney cancer as controls (CTL group). The level of
intrarenal miR-200c was downregulated, whereas the levels of intrarenal miR-141, 
miR-205 and miR-192 were upregulated in IgA but not GS group. Proteinuria
significantly correlated with the intrarenal expression of miR-200c (r=-0.324,
P=0.011) and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) significantly correlated with the
intrarenal expression of miR-205 (r=-0.280, P=0.030). The degree of
tubulointerstitial scarring correlated with miR-205 expression (r=0.389,
P=0.021), whereas glomerulosclerosis correlated with miR-192 expression
(r=-0.311, P=0.045). The rate of GFR decline significantly correlated with the
intrarenal expression of miR-192 (r=0.373, P=0.015). The intrarenal expression of
E-cadherin significantly correlated with the intrarenal expression of miR-200c
(r=0.392, P=0.002). The results show that intrarenal expression of miR-200c,
miR-141, miR-205 and miR-192 was diversely regulated and correlated with disease 
severity and progression in patients with IgA nephropathy. These miRNA species
may be important in the pathogenesis and progression of IgA nephropathy.

PMID: 19901913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Sep;9(7):873-86.

Hedgehog target genes: mechanisms of carcinogenesis induced by aberrant hedgehog 
signaling activation.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog signaling is aberrantly activated in glioma, medulloblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma, lung cancer, esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer,
breast cancer, and other tumors. Hedgehog signals activate GLI family members via
Smoothened. RTK signaling potentiates GLI activity through PI3K-AKT-mediated GSK3
inactivation or RAS-STIL1-mediated SUFU inactivation, while GPCR signaling to Gs 
represses GLI activity through adenylate cyclase-mediated PKA activation. GLI
activators bind to GACCACCCA motif to regulate transcription of GLI1, PTCH1,
PTCH2, HHIP1, MYCN, CCND1, CCND2, BCL2, CFLAR, FOXF1, FOXL1, PRDM1 (BLIMP1),
JAG2, GREM1, and Follistatin. Hedgehog signals are fine-tuned based on positive
feedback loop via GLI1 and negative feedback loop via PTCH1, PTCH2, and HHIP1.
Excessive positive feedback or collapsed negative feedback of Hedgehog signaling 
due to epigenetic or genetic alterations leads to carcinogenesis. Hedgehog
signals induce cellular proliferation through upregulation of N-Myc, Cyclin D/E, 
and FOXM1. Hedgehog signals directly upregulate JAG2, indirectly upregulate
mesenchymal BMP4 via FOXF1 or FOXL1, and also upregulate WNT2B and WNT5A.
Hedgehog signals induce stem cell markers BMI1, LGR5, CD44 and CD133 based on
cross-talk with WNT and/or other signals. Hedgehog signals upregulate BCL2 and
CFLAR to promote cellular survival, SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), ZEB1, ZEB2
(SIP1), TWIST2, and FOXC2 to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and
PTHLH (PTHrP) to promote osteolytic bone metastasis. KAAD-cyclopamine,
Mu-SSKYQ-cyclopamine, IPI-269609, SANT1, SANT2, CUR61414 and HhAntag are
small-molecule inhibitors targeted to Smoothened, GANT58, GANT61 to GLI1 and
GLI2, and Robot-nikinin to SHH. Hedgehog signaling inhibitors should be used in
combination with RTK inhibitors, GPCR modulators, and/or irradiation for cancer
therapy.

PMID: 19860666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Gynecol Oncol. 2010 Jan;116(1):117-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2009.08.009. Epub
2009 Oct 24.

Regulation of miR-200 family microRNAs and ZEB transcription factors in ovarian
cancer: evidence supporting a mesothelial-to-epithelial transition.

Bendoraite A(1), Knouf EC, Garg KS, Parkin RK, Kroh EM, O'Briant KC, Ventura AP, 
Godwin AK, Karlan BY, Drescher CW, Urban N, Knudsen BS, Tewari M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to characterize the expression and function of the
miR-200 family of microRNAs (miRNA) in ovarian carcinogenesis.
METHODS: We used qRT-PCR to examine expression of the miR-200 miRNA family and
its predicted targets, the ZEB1 and ZEB2 transcriptional repressors, in primary
cultures of normal cells from the surface of the ovary and in a panel of 70
ovarian cancer tissues and 15 ovarian cancer cell lines. We studied the
mechanisms of regulation of miR-200 miRNAs and ZEB transcription factors in
ovarian cells using 3' UTR luciferase reporters, promoter luciferase reporters
and siRNAs.
RESULTS: miR-200 family members are expressed at low or negligible levels in
normal ovarian surface cells and substantially increase in expression in ovarian 
cancer, whereas expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 shows the opposite pattern. There is 
reciprocal repression between miR-200 family members and ZEB transcription
factors, creating a double negative regulatory feedback loop resembling that
reported in other cancer cell types. In contrast to epithelial cells from other
sites, expression levels of miR-200 miRNAs and ZEB1/2 in cells from the ovarian
surface are more consistent with a mesenchymal cell phenotype, potentially
reflecting the mesothelial origin of the ovarian surface.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of ovarian cancer tissues suggests that ovarian surface
cells acquire a more epithelial miR-200-ZEB1/2 phenotype as they undergo
transformation, switching from a miR-200 familyLOW and ZEB1/2HIGH state to a
miR-200 familyHIGH and ZEB1/2LOW phenotype. Collectively, our data support the
mesothelial-to-epithelial (Meso-E-T) model for development of ovarian cancers
that arise from ovarian surface cells, as has been proposed previously on the
basis of studies of protein markers.

PMCID: PMC2867670
PMID: 19854497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2009 Dec;13(12):1439-48. doi:
10.1517/14728220903338777.

Targeting miR-205 in breast cancer.

Wu H(1), Mo YY.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, 825 N. Rutledge, PO Box 19626,
Springfield, IL 62794, USA.

As small non-coding regulatory RNAs, microRNAs are capable of silencing gene
expression by translational repression or mRNA degradation. Accumulating evidence
indicates that deregulation of microRNAs is often associated with human
malignancies and suggests a causal role of microRNAs in neoplasia, presumably
because microRNAs can function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Among them,
miR-205 is significantly underexpressed in breast tumors compared with matched
normal breast tissue although miR-205 has been shown to be upregulated in some
other type of tumors. Furthermore, breast cancer cell lines, including MCF-7 and 
MDA-MB-231, express a lower level of miR-205 than the non-malignant MCF-10A
cells. Ectopic expression of miR-205 significantly inhibits cell proliferation
and anchorage-independent growth as well as cell invasion. These findings
establish the tumor suppressive role of miR-205, which is probably through direct
targeting of oncogenes such as ErbB3 and Zeb1. Therefore, miR-205 may serve as a 
unique therapeutic target for breast cancer.

PMID: 19839716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jun 1;126(11):2575-83. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24972.

E-cadherin transcriptional down-regulation by epigenetic and microRNA-200 family 
alterations is related to mesenchymal and drug-resistant phenotypes in human
breast cancer cells.

Tryndyak VP(1), Beland FA, Pogribny IP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological
Research, Jefferson, AR, USA.

The conversion of early stage tumors into invasive malignancies with an
aggressive phenotype has been associated with the irreversible loss of E-cadherin
expression. The loss of E-cadherin expression in human tumors, including breast
cancer, has been attributed to promoter CpG island hypermethylation and direct
inhibition by transcriptional repressors. Recent evidence demonstrates that
up-regulation of E-cadherin by microRNA-200b (miR-200b) and miR-200c through
direct targeting of transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin, ZEB1, and ZEB2,
inhibits epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a crucial process in the
tumor progression. We demonstrate that microRNA miR-200 family-mediated
transcriptional up-regulation of E-cadherin in mesenchymal MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 
cells is associated directly with translational repression of ZEB1 and indirectly
with increased acetylation of histone H3 at the E-cadherin promoter. The increase
in histone H3 acetylation may be attributed to the disruption of repressive
complexes between ZEB1 and histone deacetylases and to the inhibition of SIRT1, a
class III histone deacetylase. These events inhibit EMT and reactivate a less
aggressive epithelial phenotype in cancer cells. Additionally, disruption of
ZEB1-histone deacetylase repressor complexes and down-regulation of SIRT1 histone
deacetylase up-regulate proapoptotic genes in the p53 apoptotic pathway resulting
in the increased sensitivity of cancer cells to the chemotherapeutic agent
doxorubicin.

PMID: 19839049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2009;85(8):314-23.

Transforming growth factor-beta signaling in epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and progression of cancer.

Miyazono K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. miyazono@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a multifunctional cytokine that
induces growth arrest, tissue fibrosis, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) through activation of Smad and non-Smad signaling pathways. EMT is the
differentiation switch by which polarized epithelial cells differentiate into
contractile and motile mesenchymal cells. Cell motility and invasive capacity are
activated upon EMT. Multiple transcription factors, including deltaEF1/ZEB1,
SIP1/ZEB2, and Snail/SNAI1, are induced by TGF-beta-Smad signaling and play
critical roles in TGF-beta-induced EMT. In addition, both non-Smad signaling
activated by TGF-beta and cross-talk with other signaling pathways play important
roles in induction of EMT. Of these, Ras signaling synergizes with TGF-beta-Smad 
signaling, and plays an important role in the induction of EMT. TGF-beta
inhibitors prevent invasion and metastasis of advanced cancer through multiple
mechanisms, including inhibition of EMT. The discovery of molecules that inhibit 
TGF-beta-induced EMT but not TGF-beta-induced growth arrest may be an ideal
strategy for treatment of invasion and metastasis of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3621568
PMID: 19838011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Oncogene. 2009 Dec 10;28(49):4375-85. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.285.

SNAI1 expression in colon cancer related with CDH1 and VDR downregulation in
normal adjacent tissue.

Peña C(1), García JM, Larriba MJ, Barderas R, Gómez I, Herrera M, García V, Silva
J, Domínguez G, Rodríguez R, Cuevas J, de Herreros AG, Casal JI, Muñoz A, Bonilla
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro
Majadahonda, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.

SNAI1, ZEB1, E-cadherin (CDH1), and vitamin D receptor (VDR) genes regulate the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that initiates the invasion process of
many tumor cells. We hypothesized that this process could also affect the
behavior of normal cells adjacent to the tumor. To verify this hypothesis, the
expression level of these genes was determined by quantitative RT-PCR in tumor,
normal adjacent, and normal distant tissues from 32 colorectal cancer (CC)
patients. In addition, we extended the study to human HaCaT normal keratinocytes 
and SW480-ADH colon cancer cells co-cultured with SW480-ADH cells overexpressing 
the mouse Snai1 gene. Of 18 CC cases with SNAI1 expression in tumor tissue, five 
also had SNAI1 in normal adjacent tissue (NAT). Expression of SNAI1 in tumor
tissue correlated with downregulation of CDH1 and VDR genes in both tumor
(P=0.047 and P=0.014, respectively) and NAT lacking SNAI1 expression (P=0.054 and
P=0.003). ZEB1 expression was directly related to VDR expression in tumor tissue 
(r=0.39; P=0.027) and inversely to CDH1 in NAT (r=-0.46; P=0.010). CDH1 and VDR
were also downregulated in SW480-ADH and MaCaT cells, respectively, when they
were co-cultured with Snai1-expressing cells. Furthermore, cytokine analysis
showed differences in the conditioned media obtained from the two cell types.
These results indicate that histologically normal tissue adjacent to tumor tissue
expressing the EMT-inducing gene SNAI1 shows alterations in the expression of
epithelial differentiation genes such as CDH1 and VDR.

PMID: 19802011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 27;284(48):33019-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034553. Epub
2009 Oct 1.

The miR200 family of microRNAs regulates WAVE3-dependent cancer cell invasion.

Sossey-Alaoui K(1), Bialkowska K, Plow EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. sosseyk@ccf.org

MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that are directly involved in the regulation 
of gene expression by either translational repression or degradation of target
mRNAs. Because of the high level of conservation of the target motifs, known as
seed sequences, within the 3'-untranslated regions, a single microRNA can
regulate numerous target genes simultaneously, making this class of RNAs a
powerful regulator of gene expression. The miR200 family of microRNAs has
recently been shown to regulate the process of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition during tumor progression and metastasis. Here, we report that the
expression of WAVE3, an actin cytoskeleton remodeling and metastasis promoter
protein, is regulated by miR200 microRNAs. We show a clear inverse correlation
between expression levels of WAVE3 and miR200 microRNAs in invasive versus
non-invasive cancer cells. miR200 directly targets the 3'-untranslated regions of
the WAVE3 mRNA and inhibits its expression. The miR200-mediated down-regulation
of WAVE3 results in a significant reduction in the invasive phenotype of cancer
cells, which is specific to the loss of WAVE3 expression. Re-expression of a
miR200-resistant WAVE3 reverses miR200-mediated inhibition of cancer cell
invasion. Loss of WAVE3 expression downstream of miR200 also results in a
dramatic change in cell morphology resembling that of a mesenchymal to epithelial
transition. In conclusion, a novel mechanism for the regulation of WAVE3
expression in cancer cells has been identified, which controls the invasive
properties and morphology of cancer cells associated with their metastatic
potential.

PMCID: PMC2785142
PMID: 19801681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 29;4(9):e7181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007181.

miR-200 enhances mouse breast cancer cell colonization to form distant
metastases.

Dykxhoorn DM(1), Wu Y, Xie H, Yu F, Lal A, Petrocca F, Martinvalet D, Song E, Lim
B, Lieberman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Immune Disease Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. ddykxhoorn@med.miami.edu

BACKGROUND: The development of metastases involves the dissociation of cells from
the primary tumor to penetrate the basement membrane, invade and then exit the
vasculature to seed, and colonize distant tissues. The last step, establishment
of macroscopic tumors at distant sites, is the least well understood. Four
isogenic mouse breast cancer cell lines (67NR, 168FARN, 4TO7, and 4T1) that
differ in their ability to metastasize when implanted into the mammary fat pad
are used to model the steps of metastasis. Only 4T1 forms macroscopic lung and
liver metastases. Because some miRNAs are dysregulated in cancer and affect
cellular transformation, tumor formation, and metastasis, we examined whether
changes in miRNA expression might explain the differences in metastasis of these 
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: miRNA expression was analyzed by miRNA microarray
and quantitative RT-PCR in isogenic mouse breast cancer cells with distinct
metastatic capabilities. 4T1 cells that form macroscopic metastases had elevated 
expression of miR-200 family miRNAs compared to related cells that invade distant
tissues, but are unable to colonize. Moreover, over-expressing miR-200 in 4TO7
cells enabled them to metastasize to lung and liver. These findings are
surprising since the miR-200 family was previously shown to promote epithelial
characteristics by inhibiting the transcriptional repressor Zeb2 and thereby
enhancing E-cadherin expression. We confirmed these findings in these cells. The 
most metastatic 4T1 cells acquired epithelial properties (high expression of
E-cadherin and cytokeratin-18) compared to the less metastatic cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Expression of miR-200, which promotes a mesenchymal to 
epithelial cell transition (MET) by inhibiting Zeb2 expression, unexpectedly
enhances macroscopic metastases in mouse breast cancer cell lines. These results 
suggest that for some tumors, tumor colonization at metastatic sites might be
enhanced by MET. Therefore the epithelial nature of a tumor does not predict
metastatic outcome.

PMCID: PMC2749331
PMID: 19787069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Stem Cells. 2009 Nov;27(11):2722-33. doi: 10.1002/stem.226.

A mesenchymal-like ZEB1(+) niche harbors dorsal radial glial fibrillary acidic
protein-positive stem cells in the spinal cord.

Sabourin JC(1), Ackema KB, Ohayon D, Guichet PO, Perrin FE, Garces A, Ripoll C,
Charité J, Simonneau L, Kettenmann H, Zine A, Privat A, Valmier J, Pattyn A,
Hugnot JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U583,
Physiopathologie et Thérapie des déficits sensoriels et moteurs, Institut des
Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital St. ELOI, Montpellier, France.

In humans and rodents the adult spinal cord harbors neural stem cells located
around the central canal. Their identity, precise location, and specific
signaling are still ill-defined and controversial. We report here on a detailed
analysis of this niche. Using microdissection and glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP)-green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic mice, we demonstrate that
neural stem cells are mostly dorsally located GFAP(+) cells lying ependymally and
subependymally that extend radial processes toward the pial surface. The niche
also harbors doublecortin protein (Dcx)(+) Nkx6.1(+) neurons sending processes
into the lumen. Cervical and lumbar spinal cord neural stem cells maintain
expression of specific rostro-caudal Hox gene combinations and the niche shows
high levels of signaling proteins (CD15, Jagged1, Hes1, differential
screening-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma [DAN]). More surprisingly,
the niche displays mesenchymal traits such as expression of
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition zinc finger E-box-binding protein 1 (ZEB1)
transcription factor and smooth muscle actin. We found ZEB1 to be essential for
neural stem cell survival in vitro. Proliferation within the niche progressively 
ceases around 13 weeks when the spinal cord reaches its final size, suggesting an
active role in postnatal development. In addition to hippocampus and
subventricular zone niches, adult spinal cord constitutes a third central nervous
system stem cell niche with specific signaling, cellular, and structural
characteristics that could possibly be manipulated to alleviate spinal cord
traumatic and degenerative diseases.

PMID: 19785035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Genes Dev. 2009 Sep 15;23(18):2152-65. doi: 10.1101/gad.1820109.

MicroRNA dynamics in the stages of tumorigenesis correlate with hallmark
capabilities of cancer.

Olson P(1), Lu J, Zhang H, Shai A, Chun MG, Wang Y, Libutti SK, Nakakura EK,
Golub TR, Hanahan D.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA.

While altered expression of microRNAs (miRs) in tumors has been well documented, 
it remains unclear how the miR transcriptome intersects neoplastic progression.
By profiling the miR transcriptome we identified miR expression signatures
associated with steps in tumorigenesis and the acquisition of hallmark
capabilities in a prototypical mouse model of cancer. Metastases and a rare
subset of primary tumors shared a distinct miR signature, implicating a discrete 
lineage for metastatic tumors. The miR-200 family is strongly down-regulated in
metastases and met-like primary tumors, thereby relieving repression of the
mesenchymal transcription factor Zeb1, which in turn suppresses E-cadherin.
Treatment with a clinically approved angiogenesis inhibitor normalized angiogenic
signature miRs in primary tumors, while altering expression of metastatic
signature miRs similarly to liver metastases, suggesting their involvement in
adaptive resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy via enhanced metastasis. Many of
the miR changes associated with specific stages and hallmark capabilities in the 
mouse model are similarly altered in human tumors, including cognate pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors, implying a generality.

PMCID: PMC2751988
PMID: 19759263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Sep 15;10:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-89.

Interaction of ZEB and histone deacetylase with the PLDLS-binding cleft region of
monomeric C-terminal binding protein 2.

Zhao LJ(1), Kuppuswamy M, Vijayalingam S, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, St, Louis, Missouri 63104, USA. zhaol@slu.edu

BACKGROUND: Proteins of the C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family, CtBP1 and
CtBP2 are closely related transcriptional regulators that are coded by two
different gene loci in the vertebrate genomes. They perform redundant and unique 
functions during animal development. CtBP proteins mediate their transcriptional 
function through interaction with various DNA-binding repressors that contain
PLDLS-like motifs and chromatin modifying enzymes, such as class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC) that do not contain such motifs. The N-terminal region of
CtBP1/2 forms a hydrophobic cleft and is involved in interaction with both
PLDLS-containing factors and non-PLDLS factors. CtBP proteins function as dimers 
to mediate transcriptional repression and dimerization is modulated by specific
binding to NAD/NADH.
RESULTS: In this study, we have investigated the role of dimerization of CtBP2 in
recruitment of PLDLS-motif cofactors and non-PLDLS cofactors. Our results
indicate that mutations in CtBP2 that interfere with dimerization abolish CtBP2
interaction with most cellular factors, except the PLDLS-motif factor zinc-finger
E-box binding homeobox (ZEB) and the non-PLDLS factor HDAC2. Unlike most
PLDLS-containing CtBP-binding proteins, ZEB contains three PLDLS-like motifs and 
all three contribute to the interaction with the CtBP2 monomer. Despite the
ability to interact with ZEB and HDAC, the CtBP2 monomer fails to mediate
ZEB-dependent transcriptional repression. The lack of repression activity of the 
CtBP2 monomer is correlated with the competition between ZEB and HDAC for
interaction with the CtBP2 monomer.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a competition between the canonical PLDLS-motif
factors such as E1A and non-PLDLS factor HDAC for interaction with CtBP. They
also indicate that the affinity for the CtBP monomer may be determined by the
number as well as amino acid sequence compositions of the PLDLS-like motifs. Our 
results are consistent with a model that the CtBP2 dimer may interact with a
PLDLS-containing repressor through one monomer and recruit HDAC and other
chromatin modifying enzymes through the second monomer in the CtBP2 dimer.

PMCID: PMC2749851
PMID: 19754958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer Cell. 2009 Sep 8;16(3):195-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.08.010.

14-3-3zeta Cooperates with ErbB2 to promote ductal carcinoma in situ progression 
to invasive breast cancer by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Lu J(1), Guo H, Treekitkarnmongkol W, Li P, Zhang J, Shi B, Ling C, Zhou X, Chen 
T, Chiao PJ, Feng X, Seewaldt VL, Muller WJ, Sahin A, Hung MC, Yu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Adh Migr. 2010 Jan-Mar;4(1):7-9.

ErbB2, a metastasis-promoting oncoprotein, is overexpressed in approximately 25% 
of invasive/metastatic breast cancers, but in 50%-60% of noninvasive ductal
carcinomas in situ (DCIS). It has been puzzling how a subset of
ErbB2-overexpressing DCIS develops into invasive breast cancer (IBC). We found
that co-overexpression of 14-3-3zeta in ErbB2-overexpressing DCIS conferred a
higher risk of progression to IBC. ErbB2 and 14-3-3zeta overexpression,
respectively, increased cell migration and decreased cell adhesion, two
prerequisites of tumor cell invasion. 14-3-3zeta overexpression reduced cell
adhesion by activating the TGF-beta/Smads pathway that led to ZFHX1B/SIP-1
upregulation, E-cadherin loss, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
Importantly, patients whose breast tumors overexpressed both ErbB2 and 14-3-3zeta
had higher rates of metastatic recurrence and death than those whose tumors
overexpressed only one.

PMCID: PMC2754239
PMID: 19732720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Vis. 2009 Aug 26;15:1700-8.

Exclusion of known corneal dystrophy genes in an autosomal dominant pedigree of a
unique anterior membrane corneal dystrophy.

Vincent AL(1), Markie DM, De Karolyi B, Wheeldon CE, Patel DV, Grupcheva CN,
McGhee CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, New Zealand National Eye Centre, Faculty of
Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
a.vincent@auckland.ac.nz

PURPOSE: With advances in phenotyping tools and availability of molecular
characterization, an increasing number of phenotypically and genotypically
diverse inherited corneal dystrophies are described. We aimed to determine the
underlying causative genetic mechanism in a three-generation pedigree affected
with a unique anterior membrane corneal dystrophy characterized by early onset
recurrent corneal erosions, small discrete focal opacities at the level of Bowman
layer and anterior stroma, anterior stromal flecks, and prominent corneal nerves.
METHODS: Twenty affected and unaffected members of a three-generation family were
examined and extensively clinically characterized including corneal topography
and in vivo confocal microscopy, and biological specimens were collected for DNA 
extraction. Mutational analysis of two corneal genes (TGFBI [Transforming Growth 
factor-beta induced] and ZEB1 [zinc finger E box-binding homeobox 1]) was
undertaken, in addition to testing with the Asper Corneal Dystrophy gene chip
(Asper Ophthalmics, Tartu, Estonia). Subsequent Genotyping To 11 Known Corneal
Gene Loci (COL8A2 [Collagen, Type VIII, Alpha-2], TACSTD2 [Tumor-Associated
Calcium Signal Transducer 2], PIP5K3 [Phosphatidylinositol-3-Phosphate 5-Kinase, 
Type III], GSN [Gelsolin], KERA [Keratocan], VSX1 [Visual System Homeobox Gene
1], COL6A1 [Collagen, Type VI, Alpha-1], MMP9 [Matrix Metalloproteinase 9], KRT3 
[Keratin 3]), and two putative loci, 3p14-q13 and 15q22.33-24) was undertaken
using polymorphic markers, and haplotypes constructed. Multipoint linkage
analysis was performed to generate LOD scores and produce LOD plots across the
candidate intervals.
RESULTS: No pathogenic sequence variations were detected in TGFBI or ZEB1 of the 
proband nor on the Asper Corneal Dystrophy gene chip (302 mutations in 12 genes).
Multipoint linkage analysis of 11 known corneal genes and loci generated negative
LOD plots and was able to exclude all genes tested including PIP5K3.
CONCLUSIONS: Exclusion of linkage to candidate corneal loci combined with an
absence of pathogenic mutations in known corneal genes in this pedigree suggest a
different genetic causative mechanism in this dystrophy than the previously
documented corneal genes. This unique phenotype of an anterior membrane dystrophy
may therefore provide an opportunity to identify a new gene responsible for
corneal disease.

PMCID: PMC2731832
PMID: 19710953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 1;106(35):14884-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902042106. Epub 2009 Aug 17.

SIP1 protein protects cells from DNA damage-induced apoptosis and has independent
prognostic value in bladder cancer.

Sayan AE(1), Griffiths TR, Pal R, Browne GJ, Ruddick A, Yagci T, Edwards R, Mayer
NJ, Qazi H, Goyal S, Fernandez S, Straatman K, Jones GD, Bowman KJ, Colquhoun A, 
Mellon JK, Kriajevska M, Tulchinsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, University of Leicester, 
Leicester LE2 7XL, United Kingdom.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to cancer metastasis. Two
ZEB family members, ZEB1 and ZEB2(SIP1), inhibit transcription of the E-cadherin 
gene and induce EMT in vitro. However, their relevance to human cancer is
insufficiently studied. Here, we performed a comparative study of SIP1 and ZEB1
proteins in cancer cell lines and in one form of human malignancy, carcinoma of
the bladder. Whereas ZEB1 protein was expressed in all E-cadherin-negative
carcinoma cell lines, being in part responsible for the high motility of bladder 
cancer cells, SIP1 was hardly ever detectable in carcinoma cells in culture.
However, SIP1 represented an independent factor of poor prognosis (P = 0.005) in 
a series of bladder cancer specimens obtained from patients treated with
radiotherapy. In contrast, ZEB1 was rarely expressed in tumor tissues; and
E-cadherin status did not correlate with the patients' survival. SIP1 protected
cells from UV- and cisplatin-induced apoptosis in vitro but had no effect on the 
level of DNA damage. The anti-apoptotic effect of SIP1 was independent of either 
cell cycle arrest or loss of cell-cell adhesion and was associated with reduced
phosphorylation of ATM/ATR targets in UV-treated cells. The prognostic value of
SIP1 and its role in DNA damage response establish a link between genetic
instability and metastasis and suggest a potential importance for this protein as
a therapeutic target. In addition, we conclude that the nature of an EMT pathway 
rather than the deregulation of E-cadherin per se is critical for the progression
of the disease and patients' survival.

PMCID: PMC2736415
PMID: 19706487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Nov;29(21):5923-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00332-09. Epub 2009 Aug 
24.

Downregulated microRNA-200a in meningiomas promotes tumor growth by reducing
E-cadherin and activating the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

Saydam O(1), Shen Y, Würdinger T, Senol O, Boke E, James MF, Tannous BA,
Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Yi M, Stephens RM, Fraefel C, Gusella JF, Krichevsky AM,
Breakefield XO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Neuroscience
Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Meningiomas, one of the most common human brain tumors, are derived from
arachnoidal cells associated with brain meninges, are usually benign, and are
frequently associated with neurofibromatosis type 2. Here, we define a typical
human meningioma microRNA (miRNA) profile and characterize the effects of one
downregulated miRNA, miR-200a, on tumor growth. Elevated levels of miR-200a
inhibited meningioma cell growth in culture and in a tumor model in vivo.
Upregulation of miR-200a decreased the expression of transcription factors ZEB1
and SIP1, with consequent increased expression of E-cadherin, an adhesion protein
associated with cell differentiation. Downregulation of miR-200a in meningiomas
and arachnoidal cells resulted in increased expression of beta-catenin and cyclin
D1 involved in cell proliferation. miR-200a was found to directly target
beta-catenin mRNA, thereby inhibiting its translation and blocking
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, which is frequently involved in cancer. A direct
correlation was found between the downregulation of miR-200a and the upregulation
of beta-catenin in human meningioma samples. Thus, miR-200a appears to act as a
multifunctional tumor suppressor miRNA in meningiomas through effects on the
E-cadherin and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathways. This reveals a previously
unrecognized signaling cascade involved in meningioma tumor development and
highlights a novel molecular interaction between miR-200a and Wnt signaling,
thereby providing insights into novel therapies for meningiomas.

PMCID: PMC2772747
PMID: 19703993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 15;15(16):5060-72. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2245. 
Epub 2009 Aug 11.

miR-200 expression regulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in bladder
cancer cells and reverses resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor therapy.

Adam L(1), Zhong M, Choi W, Qi W, Nicoloso M, Arora A, Calin G, Wang H,
Siefker-Radtke A, McConkey D, Bar-Eli M, Dinney C.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA. ladam@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a cell
development-regulated process in which noncoding RNAs act as crucial modulators. 
Recent studies have implied that EMT may contribute to resistance to epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR)-directed therapy. The aims of this study were to
determine the potential role of microRNAs (miRNA) in controlling EMT and the role
of EMT in inducing the sensitivity of human bladder cancer cells to the
inhibitory effects of the anti-EGFR therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: miRNA array screening and real-time reverse
transcription-PCR were used to identify and validate the differential expression 
of miRNAs involved in EMT in nine bladder cancer cell lines. A list of potential 
miR-200 direct targets was identified through the TargetScan database. The
precursor of miR-200b and miR-200c was expressed in UMUC3 and T24 cells using a
retrovirus or a lentivirus construct, respectively. Protein expression and
signaling pathway modulation, as well as intracellular distribution of EGFR and
ERRFI-1, were validated through Western blot analysis and confocal microscopy,
whereas ERRFI-1 direct target of miR-200 members was validated by using the
wild-type and mutant 3'-untranslated region/ERRFI-1/luciferse reporters.
RESULTS: We identified a tight association between the expression of miRNAs of
the miR-200 family, epithelial phenotype, and sensitivity to EGFR
inhibitors-induced growth inhibition in bladder carcinoma cell lines. Stable
expression of miR-200 in mesenchymal UMUC3 cells increased E-cadherin levels,
decreased expression of ZEB1, ZEB2, ERRFI-1, and cell migration, and increased
sensitivity to EGFR-blocking agents. The changes in EGFR sensitivity by silencing
or forced expression of ERRFI-1 or by miR-200 expression have also been validated
in additional cell lines, UMUC5 and T24. Finally, luciferase assays using
3'-untranslated region/ERRFI-1/luciferase and miR-200 cotransfections showed that
the direct down-regulation of ERRFI-1 was miR-200-dependent because mutations in 
the two putative miR-200-binding sites have rescued the inhibitory effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Members of the miR-200 family appear to control the EMT process and 
sensitivity to EGFR therapy in bladder cancer cells and the expression of miR-200
is sufficient to restore EGFR dependency at least in some of the mesenchymal
bladder cancer cells. The targets of miR-200 include ERRFI-1, which is a novel
regulator of EGFR-independent growth.

PMID: 19671845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Clin Invest. 2009 Aug;119(8):2343-58.

Cystatin D is a candidate tumor suppressor gene induced by vitamin D in human
colon cancer cells.

Alvarez-Díaz S(1), Valle N, García JM, Peña C, Freije JM, Quesada V, Astudillo A,
Bonilla F, López-Otín C, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

The active vitamin D metabolite 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1alpha,25(OH)2D3] 
has wide but not fully understood antitumor activity. A previous transcriptomic
analysis of 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 action on human colon cancer cells revealed cystatin
D (CST5), which encodes an inhibitor of several cysteine proteases of the
cathepsin family, as a candidate target gene. Here we report that
1alpha,25(OH)2D3 induced vitamin D receptor (VDR) binding to, and activation of, 
the CST5 promoter and increased CST5 RNA and protein levels in human colon cancer
cells. In cells lacking endogenous cystatin D, ectopic cystatin D expression
inhibited both proliferation in vitro and xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
Furthermore, cystatin D inhibited migration and anchorage-independent growth,
antagonized the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, and repressed c-MYC
expression. Cystatin D repressed expression of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition inducers SNAI1, SNAI2, ZEB1, and ZEB2 and, conversely, induced
E-cadherin and other adhesion proteins. CST5 knockdown using shRNA abrogated the 
antiproliferative effect of 1alpha,25(OH)2D3, attenuated E-cadherin expression,
and increased c-MYC expression. In human colorectal tumors, expression of
cystatin D correlated with expression of VDR and E-cadherin, and loss of cystatin
D correlated with poor tumor differentiation. Based on these data, we propose
that CST5 has tumor suppressor activity that may contribute to the antitumoral
action of 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2719930
PMID: 19662683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 15;69(16):6704-12. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1298. Epub 
2009 Aug 4.

Up-regulation of miR-200 and let-7 by natural agents leads to the reversal of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer
cells.

Li Y(1), VandenBoom TG 2nd, Kong D, Wang Z, Ali S, Philip PA, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer death in the United
States, and the aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer is in part due to its
intrinsic and extrinsic drug resistance characteristics, which are also
associated with the acquisition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Emerging evidence also suggests that the processes of EMT are regulated by the
expression status of many microRNAs (miRNA), which are believed to function as
key regulators of various biological and pathologic processes during tumor
development and progression. In the present study, we compared the expression of 
miRNAs between gemcitabine-sensitive and gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer 
cells and investigated whether the treatment of cells with "natural agents"
[3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM) or isoflavone] could affect the expression of
miRNAs. We found that the expression of miR-200b, miR-200c, let-7b, let-7c,
let-7d, and let-7e was significantly down-regulated in gemcitabine-resistant
cells, which showed EMT characteristics such as elongated fibroblastoid
morphology, lower expression of epithelial marker E-cadherin, and higher
expression of mesenchymal markers such as vimentin and ZEB1. Moreover, we found
that reexpression of miR-200 by transfection studies or treatment of
gemcitabine-resistant cells with either DIM or isoflavone resulted in the
down-regulation of ZEB1, slug, and vimentin, which was consistent with
morphologic reversal of EMT phenotype leading to epithelial morphology. These
results provide experimental evidence, for the first time, that DIM and
isoflavone could function as miRNA regulators leading to the reversal of EMT
phenotype, which is likely to be important for designing novel therapies for
pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC2727571
PMID: 19654291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 1;23(15):1737-42. doi: 10.1101/gad.1809309.

A developmentally regulated inducer of EMT, LBX1, contributes to breast cancer
progression.

Yu M(1), Smolen GA, Zhang J, Wittner B, Schott BJ, Brachtel E, Ramaswamy S,
Maheswaran S, Haber DA.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays an important role during normal 
embryogenesis, and it has been implicated in cancer invasion and metastasis.
Here, we report that Ladybird homeobox 1 (LBX1), a developmentally regulated
homeobox gene, directs expression of the known EMT inducers ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail1,
and transforming growth factor beta2 (TGFB2). In mammary epithelial cells,
overexpression of LBX1 leads to morphological transformation, expression of
mesenchymal markers, enhanced cell migration, increased CD44(high)/CD24(low)
progenitor cell population, and tumorigenic cooperation with known oncogenes. In 
human breast cancer, LBX1 is up-regulated in the unfavorable estrogen receptor
(ER)/progesterone (PR)/HER2 triple-negative basal-like subtype. Thus, aberrant
expression of LBX1 may lead to the activation of a developmentally regulated EMT 
pathway in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2720264
PMID: 19651985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Lung Cancer. 2010 May;68(2):154-60. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.06.012. Epub 2009
Jul 23.

Dithiolethione modified valproate and diclofenac increase E-cadherin expression
and decrease proliferation of non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Moody TW(1), Switzer C, Santana-Flores W, Ridnour LA, Berna M, Thill M, Jensen
RT, Sparatore A, Del Soldato P, Yeh GC, Roberts DD, Giaccone G, Wink DA.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Office of the Director, Center for Cancer Research,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1500, USA. moodyt@mail.nih.gov

The effects of dithiolethione modified valproate, diclofenac and sulindac on
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells were investigated. Sulfur(S)-valproate
and S-diclofenac at 1 microg/ml concentrations significantly reduced
prostaglandin (PG)E(2) levels in NSCLC cell lines A549 and NCI-H1299 as did the
COX-2 inhibitor DuP-697. In vitro, S-valproate, S-diclofenac and S-sulindac
half-maximally inhibited the clonal growth of NCI-H1299 cells at 6, 6 and 15
microg/ml, respectively. Using the MTT assay, 10 microg/ml S-valproate,
NO-aspirin and Cay10404, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, but not SC-560, a selective
COX-1 inhibitor, inhibited the growth of A549 cells. In vivo, 18mg/kg i.p. of
S-valproate and S-diclofenac, but not S-sulindac, significantly inhibited A549 or
NCI-H1299 xenograft proliferation in nude mice, but had no effect on the nude
mouse body weight. The mechanism by which S-valproate and S-diclofenac inhibited 
the growth of NSCLC cells was investigated. Nitric oxide-aspirin but not
S-valproate caused apoptosis of NSCLC cells. By Western blot, S-valproate and
S-diclofenac increased E-cadherin but reduced vimentin and ZEB1 (a
transcriptional suppressor of E-cadherin) protein expression in NSCLC cells.
Because S-valproate and S-diclofenac inhibit the growth of NSCLC cells and reduce
PGE(2) levels, they may prove beneficial in the chemoprevention and/or therapy of
NSCLC.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3835159
PMID: 19628293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jul 15;9:235. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-235.

Staurosporine augments EGF-mediated EMT in PMC42-LA cells through actin
depolymerisation, focal contact size reduction and Snail1 induction - a model for
cross-modulation.

Hugo HJ(1), Wafai R, Blick T, Thompson EW, Newgreen DF.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Laboratory, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's
Hospital, Parkville, Australia. hhugo@svi.edu.au

BACKGROUND: A feature of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) relevant to
tumour dissemination is the reorganization of actin cytoskeleton/focal contacts, 
influencing cellular ECM adherence and motility. This is coupled with the
transcriptional repression of E-cadherin, often mediated by Snail1, Snail2 and
Zeb1/deltaEF1. These genes, overexpressed in breast carcinomas, are known targets
of growth factor-initiated pathways, however it is less clear how alterations in 
ECM attachment cross-modulate to regulate these pathways. EGF induces EMT in the 
breast cancer cell line PMC42-LA and the kinase inhibitor staurosporine (ST)
induces EMT in embryonic neural epithelial cells, with F-actin de-bundling and
disruption of cell-cell adhesion, via inhibition of aPKC.
METHODS: PMC42-LA cells were treated for 72 h with 10 ng/ml EGF, 40 nM ST, or
both, and assessed for expression of E-cadherin repressor genes (Snail1, Snail2, 
Zeb1/deltaEF1) and EMT-related genes by QRT-PCR, multiplex tandem PCR (MT-PCR)
and immunofluorescence +/- cycloheximide. Actin and focal contacts (paxillin)
were visualized by confocal microscopy. A public database of human breast cancers
was assessed for expression of Snail1 and Snail2 in relation to outcome.
RESULTS: When PMC42-LA were treated with EGF, Snail2 was the principal E-cadherin
repressor induced. With ST or ST+EGF this shifted to Snail1, with more extreme
EMT and Zeb1/deltaEF1 induction seen with ST+EGF. ST reduced stress fibres and
focal contact size rapidly and independently of gene transcription. Gene
expression analysis by MT-PCR indicated that ST repressed many genes which were
induced by EGF (EGFR, CAV1, CTGF, CYR61, CD44, S100A4) and induced genes which
alter the actin cytoskeleton (NLF1, NLF2, EPHB4). Examination of the public
database of breast cancers revealed tumours exhibiting higher Snail1 expression
have an increased risk of disease-recurrence. This was not seen for Snail2, and
Zeb1/deltaEF1 showed a reverse correlation with lower expression values being
predictive of increased risk.
CONCLUSION: ST in combination with EGF directed a greater EMT via actin
depolymerisation and focal contact size reduction, resulting in a loosening of
cell-ECM attachment along with Snail1-Zeb1/deltaEF1 induction. This appeared
fundamentally different to the EGF-induced EMT, highlighting the multiple
pathways which can regulate EMT. Our findings add support for a functional role
for Snail1 in invasive breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2717979
PMID: 19604397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 15;8(14):2141-2. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Opening the treasure chest of miR-200s family members.

Davalos V, Esteller M.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):2064-9.

PMID: 19587544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;69(14):5820-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2819. Epub
2009 Jul 7.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition contributes to drug resistance in pancreatic
cancer.

Arumugam T(1), Ramachandran V, Fournier KF, Wang H, Marquis L, Abbruzzese JL,
Gallick GE, Logsdon CD, McConkey DJ, Choi W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

A better understanding of drug resistance mechanisms is required to improve
outcomes in patients with pancreatic cancer. Here, we characterized patterns of
sensitivity and resistance to three conventional chemotherapeutic agents with
divergent mechanisms of action [gemcitabine, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and
cisplatin] in pancreatic cancer cells. Four (L3.6pl, BxPC-3, CFPAC-1, and
SU86.86) were sensitive and five (PANC-1, Hs766T, AsPC-1, MIAPaCa-2, and MPanc96)
were resistant to all three agents based on GI(50) (50% growth inhibition). Gene 
expression profiling and unsupervised hierarchical clustering revealed that the
sensitive and resistant cells formed two distinct groups and differed in
expression of specific genes, including several features of "epithelial to
mesenchymal transition" (EMT). Interestingly, an inverse correlation between
E-cadherin and its transcriptional suppressor, Zeb-1, was observed in the gene
expression data and was confirmed by real-time PCR. Independent validation
experiment using five new pancreatic cancer cell lines confirmed that an inverse 
correlation between E-cadherin and Zeb-1 correlated closely with resistance to
gemcitabine, 5-FU, and cisplatin. Silencing Zeb-1 in the mesenchymal lines not
only increased the expression of E-cadherin but also other epithelial markers,
such as EVA1 and MAL2, and restored drug sensitivity. Importantly,
immunohistochemical analysis of E-cadherin and Zeb-1 in primary tumors confirmed 
that expression of the two proteins was mutually exclusive (P = 0.012).
Therefore, our results suggest that Zeb-1 and other regulators of EMT may
maintain drug resistance in human pancreatic cancer cells, and therapeutic
strategies to inhibit Zeb-1 and reverse EMT should be evaluated.

PMCID: PMC4378690
PMID: 19584296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Stem Cells. 2009 Aug;27(8):1712-21. doi: 10.1002/stem.101.

miR-200 regulates PDGF-D-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition, adhesion,
and invasion of prostate cancer cells.

Kong D(1), Li Y, Wang Z, Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Kim HR, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

MicroRNAs have been implicated in tumor progression. Recent studies have shown
that the miR-200 family regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by
targeting zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2. Emerging evidence
from our laboratory and others suggests that the processes of EMT can be
triggered by various growth factors, such as transforming growth factor beta and 
platelet-derived growth factor-D (PDGF-D). Moreover, we recently reported that
overexpression of PDGF-D in prostate cancer cells (PC3 PDGF-D cells) leads to the
acquisition of the EMT phenotype, and this model offers an opportunity for
investigating the molecular interplay between PDGF-D signaling and EMT. Here, we 
report, for the first time, significant downregulation of the miR-200 family in
PC3 PDGF-D cells as well as in PC3 cells exposed to purified active PDGF-D
protein, resulting in the upregulation of ZEB1, ZEB2, and Snail2 expression.
Interestingly, re-expression of miR-200b in PC3 PDGF-D cells led to reversal of
the EMT phenotype, which was associated with the downregulation of ZEB1, ZEB2,
and Snail2 expression, and these results were consistent with greater expression 
levels of epithelial markers. Moreover, transfection of PC3 PDGF-D cells with
miR-200b inhibited cell migration and invasion, with concomitant repression of
cell adhesion to the culture surface and cell detachment. From these results, we 
conclude that PDGF-D-induced acquisition of the EMT phenotype in PC3 cells is, in
part, a result of repression of miR-200 and that any novel strategy by which
miR-200 could be upregulated would become a promising approach for the treatment 
of invasive prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3400149
PMID: 19544444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Oct;221(1):254-61. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21850.

IGF-1 released by corneal epithelial cells induces up-regulation of N-cadherin in
corneal fibroblasts.

Ko JA(1), Yanai R, Nishida T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine,
Ube City, Yamaguchi, Japan. jiae0831@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

Interactions between epithelial cells and fibroblasts play important roles in
tissue homeostasis. With the use of a coculture system in which human corneal
fibroblasts and epithelial cells are cultured on opposite sides of a collagen
(vitrigel) membrane, we have examined the effects of epithelial cells on
expression of the adherens-junction protein N-cadherin in fibroblasts. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblot analyses showed that the
presence of epithelial cells increased the expression of N-cadherin in
fibroblasts at the mRNA and protein levels. This effect of epithelial cells was
mimicked by insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) but not by epidermal growth
factor or fibroblast growth factor. Depletion of IGF-1 in epithelial cells by RNA
interference abolished the effect of these cells on N-cadherin expression in
fibroblasts. The presence of epithelial cells activated the IGF-1 receptor as
well as up-regulated expression of the transcriptional regulator ZEB1 in
fibroblasts. RNA interference-mediated depletion of IGF-1 in epithelial cells
prevented the effect of these cells on ZEB1 expression in fibroblasts. These
results suggest that IGF-1 released from corneal epithelial cells up-regulates
the expression of N-cadherin in corneal fibroblasts.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19530221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Nov;50(11):5080-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-2911.
Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Zeb1 represses Mitf and regulates pigment synthesis, cell proliferation, and
epithelial morphology.

Liu Y(1), Ye F, Li Q, Tamiya S, Darling DS, Kaplan HJ, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville,
Kentucky, USA.

PURPOSE: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is important in fibrotic
responses, formation of cancer stem cells, and acquisition of a metastatic
phenotype. Zeb1 represses epithelial specification genes to enforce
epithelial-mesenchymal phenotypic boundaries during development, and it is one of
several E-box-binding repressors whose overexpression triggers EMT. The purpose
of this study was to investigate the potential role for Zeb1 in EMT leading to
the dedifferentiation of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells.
METHODS: Real-time PCR was used to examine mRNA expression during RPE
dedifferentiation in primary cultures of RPE cells from Zeb1(+/-) mice and after 
knockdown of Zeb1 by lentivirus shRNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to 
detect Zeb1 at gene promoters in vivo.
RESULTS: Zeb1 is overexpressed during RPE dedifferentiation. Heterozygous
mutation or shRNA knockdown to prevent this overexpression eliminates the onset
of proliferation, loss of epithelial morphology, and pigment, which characterizes
RPE dedifferentiation. Zeb1 binds to the Mitf A promoter in vivo, and Zeb1
mutation or shRNA knockdown derepresses the gene. The authors link Zeb1
expression to cell-cell contact and demonstrate that forcing dedifferentiated RPE
cells to adopt cell-cell only contacts via sphere formation reverses the
overexpression of Zeb1 and reprograms RPE cells back to a pigmented phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of the EMT transcription factor Zeb1 has an important
role in RPE dedifferentiation via its regulation of Mitf. Expression of Zeb1 and,
in turn, RPE dedifferentiation, is linked to cell-cell contact, and these
contacts can be used to diminish Zeb1 expression and reprogram dedifferentiated
RPE cells.

PMCID: PMC3648851
PMID: 19515996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Lab Invest. 2009 Aug;89(8):875-86. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2009.56. Epub 2009 Jun 
8.

CAR mediates efficient tumor engraftment of mesenchymal type lung cancer cells.

Veena MS(1), Qin M, Andersson A, Sharma S, Batra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The coxsackie-adenovirus receptor (CAR) is a developmentally regulated
intercellular adhesion molecule that was previously observed to be required for
efficient tumor formation. To confirm that observation, we compared the
tumorigenicity of clonally derived test and control cell subsets that were
genetically modified for CAR. Silencing CAR in lung cancer cells with high
constitutive expression reduced engraftment efficiency. Conversely,
overexpressing CAR in lung cancer cells with low constitutive expression did not 
affect tumor formation or growth kinetics. A blocking antibody to the
extracellular domain of CAR inhibited tumor engraftment, implicating that domain 
as being important to this process. However, differences in adhesion properties
attributable to this domain (barrier function and aggregation) could not be
distinguished in the test groups in vitro, and the mechanisms underlying CAR's
contribution to tumor engraftment remain elusive. Because high CAR cells
displayed a spindle-shaped morphology at baseline, we considered whether this
expression was an accompaniment of other mesenchymal features in these lung
cancer cells. Molecular correlates of CAR were compared in model epithelial and
mesenchymal type lung cancer cells. CAR expression is associated with an absence 
of E-cadherin, diminished expression of alpha- and gamma-catenin, and increased
Zeb1, Snail, and vimentin expression in lung cancer cells. In contrast,
epithelial type (NCI-H292, Calu3) lung cancer cells show comparatively low CAR
expression. These data suggest that if the mesenchymal cell phenotype is an
accurate measure of an undifferentiated and invasive state, then CAR expression
may be more closely aligned with this phenotype of lung cancer cells.

PMID: 19506548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):2064-9. Epub 2009 Jul 29.

Stable expression of miR-200c alone is sufficient to regulate TCF8 (ZEB1) and
restore E-cadherin expression.

Hurteau GJ(1), Carlson JA, Roos E, Brock GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ordway Research Institute, Albany, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 15;8(14):2141-2.

Regulation of the transcription factor TCF8 (ZEB1) by the microRNA miR-200c and
was first identified using a bioinformatic and relative quantitative PCR based
approach.(1) Using stable ectopic expression of miR-200c we then demonstrated
loss of TCF8 (ZEB1) mRNA and restoration of its primary regulatory target,
E-cadherin.(2) Recently, other members of the miR-200 'family' and an additional 
unrelated microRNA, miR-205, have been reported to be essential for the
regulation of TCF8 (ZEB1) and restoration of E-cadherin.(3-5) To investigate, we 
repeated our initial method(s) and generated individual stable cell-lines,
expressing the miR-200 'family' members; miR-200c, miR-200b, miR-141 and the
related miR-205. Of these lines, miR-200b produced no mature transcript and
miR-205 and miR-141 cells were either morphologically similar to controls or
showed some slight changes respectively. However no reduction in TCF8/ZEB1 mRNA
or restoration of E-cadherin could be detected in either line. In contrast, cells
expressing miR-200c had a significantly altered morphology from mesenchymal to
epithelial and restored expression of E-cadherin. These contrasting findings
demonstrate that, as transient transfection is in essence an RNAi experiment,
results should be treated with caution when investigating microRNAs and that an
examination of microRNAs with similar seed regions requires stable ectopic
expression to accurately reflect the endogenous mechanism(s).

PMID: 19502803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Aug;30(8):1459-68. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp140. Epub 2009 Jun
5.

Snail2 cooperates with Snail1 in the repression of vitamin D receptor in colon
cancer.

Larriba MJ(1), Martín-Villar E, García JM, Pereira F, Peña C, de Herreros AG,
Bonilla F, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto 
Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Vitamin D receptor (VDR) mediates the antitumoral action of the active vitamin D 
metabolite 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)). VDR expression is
lost during colon cancer progression causing unresponsiveness to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) 
and its analogs. Previously, Snail1, an inducer of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), was reported to inhibit VDR expression. Here, we show that
Snail2/Slug, but not other EMT inducers such as Zeb1, Zeb2, E47 or Twist1,
represses VDR gene promoter. Moreover, Snail2 and Snail1 show additive repressing
effect on VDR promoter. Snail2 inhibits VDR RNA and protein and blocks the
induction of E-cadherin and an adhesive phenotype by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Snail2
reduces the ligand-induced VDR transcriptional activation of a consensus response
element and of the CYP24 promoter. Concordantly, Snail2 inhibits the induction of
CYP24 RNA and p21(CIP1), filamin A and vinculin proteins and the repression of
c-MYC by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Additionally, Snail2 abrogates beta-catenin nuclear
export and the antagonism of the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin-T-cell 
factor complexes by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). SNAI2 expression is upregulated in 58% of
colorectal tumors and correlates inversely with that of VDR. However, VDR
downregulation is higher in tumors coexpressing SNAI2 and SNAI1 than in those
expressing only one of these genes. Together, these data indicate that Snail2 and
Snail1 cooperate for VDR repression in colon cancer.

PMID: 19502595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Ann Surg. 2009 Jun;249(6):978-85. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3181a6ce7e.

Tobacco-specific carcinogen enhances colon cancer cell migration through
alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.

Wei PL(1), Chang YJ, Ho YS, Lee CH, Yang YY, An J, Lin SY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, School of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University and Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Ann Surg. 2009 Dec;250(6):1046.

OBJECTIVE: To study the mechanism of
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK)-enhanced migration of colon 
cancer cells.
BACKGROUND DATA: Long-term cigarette smoking increases the risk of colorectal
cancer mortality. Tobacco-specific carcinogen, NNK, was reported to increase DNA 
synthesis of colon cancer cells. Since metastasis is the major cause of cancer
death, the influence of NNK on the migration of colon cancer cells remains to be 
determined.
METHODS: Receptor for NNK in colon cancer cells was identified by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and real-time PCR. The influence of NNK on migration of
colon cancer cells was evaluated by transwell and wound-healing assay.
Receptor-mediated migration was studied by both inhibitor and small interfering
RNA.
RESULTS: alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, alpha7-nAChR, was identified in
2 colon cancer cell lines, HT29 and DLD-1. NNK enhanced HT29 cell migration in
both transwell and wound-healing assays. NNK also enhanced DLD-1 cell migration
in dose dependent manner. We used inhibitor and siRNA to demonstrate that
alpha7-nAChR mediated NNK-enhanced colon cancer cell migration and downregulation
of E-cadherin were involved in NNK-enhanced migration of colon cancer cells.
Furthermore, Snail and ZEB1, 2 major transcription repressors of E-cadherin in
colon cancers, were induced by NNK treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Tobacco specific carcinogen, NNK, enhanced colon cancer metastasis
through alpha7-nAChR and E-cadherin--one of the hallmarks of epithelial
mesenchymal transition--and its transcription repressors. Therefore, smoking
should be avoided in the patients with colorectal cancer.

PMID: 19474681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 May;8(5):1055-66. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-1046. Epub 
2009 May 12.

MicroRNA-200c mitigates invasiveness and restores sensitivity to
microtubule-targeting chemotherapeutic agents.

Cochrane DR(1), Spoelstra NS, Howe EN, Nordeen SK, Richer JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

The transcription factor ZEB1 is normally not expressed in epithelial cells. When
inappropriately expressed in carcinomas, ZEB1 initiates epithelial to mesenchymal
transition due to its ability to repress E-cadherin and other genes involved in
polarity. Recently, ZEB1 and ZEB2 have been identified as direct targets of the
microRNA-200c family. We find that miR-200c levels are high in
well-differentiated endometrial, breast, and ovarian cancer cell lines, but
extremely low in poorly differentiated cancer cells. Low or absent miR-200c
results in aberrant expression of ZEB1 and consequent repression of E-cadherin.
Reinstatement of miR-200c to such cells restores E-cadherin and dramatically
reduces migration and invasion. Microarray profiling reveals that in addition to 
ZEB1 and ZEB2, other mesenchymal genes (such as FN1, NTRK2, and QKI), which are
also predicted direct targets of miR-200c, are indeed inhibited by addition of
exogenous miR-200c. One such gene, class III ß-tubulin (TUBB3), which encodes a
tubulin isotype normally found only in neuronal cells, is a direct target of
miR-200c. This finding is of particular significance because we show that
restoration of miR-200c increases sensitivity to microtubule-targeting agents by 
85%. Because expression of TUBB3 is a common mechanism of resistance to
microtubule-binding chemotherapeutic agents in many types of solid tumors, the
ability of miR-200c to restore chemosensitivity to such agents may be explained
by its ability to reduce TUBB3. Because miR-200c is crucial for maintenance of
epithelial identity, behavior, and sensitivity to chemotherapy, we propose that
it warrants further investigation as a therapeutic strategy for aggressive,
drug-resistant cancers.

PMCID: PMC4573391
PMID: 19435871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Acta Ophthalmol. 2010 Sep;88(6):695-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-3768.2009.01511.x.

Clinical phenotype of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy in a family with a
novel ZEB1 mutation.

Nguyen DQ(1), Hosseini M, Billingsley G, Héon E, Churchill AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Bristol Eye Hospital, UK.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical phenotype in a family with posterior
polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) and a novel mutation in the ZEB1 gene.
METHODS:  Clinical examination, anterior segment photography, specular microscopy
and electrophysiological investigations were performed and quantified. Genomic
DNA extracted from peripheral blood was sequenced for ZEB1 exons. Cosegregation
of identified mutation with the disease status in the family was confirmed using 
polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism.
RESULTS: Ocular examination was performed on five family members from two
generations. Three had anomalies of the corneal endothelium that were consistent 
with PPCD. Endothelial cell counts ranged from 2306 to 2987 mm(2) (ref. 2000-4000
cells/mm(2) ). No evidence of glaucoma or retinal abnormalities was observed.
Extraocular abnormalities such as inguinal herniation, hydrocoele and possible
bony or connective tissue anomalies were part of the disease spectrum in this
family. Mutation analysis revealed a novel change in exon 5 of ZEB1 (c.672delA)
that cosegregated with the affected disease status.
CONCLUSION: The detailed clinical features of PPCD associated with a novel ZEB1
mutation are supportive of the previously proposed range of phenotype parameters.
Further phenotype-genotype correlations may provide insights into the clinical
variability and pathological processes affecting the corneal endothelium,
Descemet's membrane, retinal photoreceptor function and extraocular tissues of
some patients.

© 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2009 Acta Ophthalmol.

PMID: 19432861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jun;34(6):1737-42.

Integrative genomic analyses of ZEB2: Transcriptional regulation of ZEB2 based on
SMADs, ETS1, HIF1alpha, POU/OCT, and NF-kappaB.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is defined as phenotypic change of
epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells. EMT, allowing cellular dissociation from
epithelial tissues, plays a key role in invasion and metastasis during
carcinogenesis as well as in gastrulation and neurulation during embryogenesis.
SNAI1/Snail, SNAI2/Slug, ZEB1/deltaEF1/ZFHX1A, ZEB2/SIP1/ZFHX1B, TWIST1/TWIST,
and TWIST2/DERMO1 are representative EMT regulators. ZEB2 represses transcription
of CDH1, CLDN4, CCND1, TERT, SFRP1, ALPL and miR-200b-200a-429 primary miRNA, and
upregulates transcription of mesenchymal markers. ZEB2 is relatively highly
expressed in brain corpus callosum and monocytes. ZEB2 is expressed in various
types of human tumors, such as breast cancer, gastric cancer, and pancreatic
cancer. TGFbeta, TNFalpha, IL1, AKT and hypoxia signals are involved in ZEB2
upregulation and EMT induction; however precise mechanisms of ZEB2 transcription 
remained unclear. Here, refined integrative genomic analyses of ZEB2 gene were
carried out. ZEB2 was co-expressed with POU3F2 (BRN2) and POU3F3 (BRN1) in brain 
corpus callosum, spinal cord, and fetal brain, whereas ZEB2 was co-expressed with
POU2F2 (OCT2) in monocytes. Ets-Smad-binding CGGAGAC motif, bHLH-binding site,
and POU/OCT-binding site within proximal promoter region, and NF-kappaB-binding
site within intron 2 were completely conserved in human ZEB2, chimpanzee ZEB2,
cow ZEB2, mouse Zeb2, rat Zeb2, and chicken zeb2 genes. In addition,
HIF1alpha-binding site within proximal promoter region was conserved in mammalian
ZEB2 orthologs. Consensus binding site for Hedgehog effector GLI was not
identified within or adjacent to the 7-kb regions of human ZEB2 gene. TGFbeta,
TNFalpha, IL1, and hypoxia signals directly upregulate ZEB2 to induce EMT, growth
arrest, and senescence, whereas Hedgehog signals indirectly upregulate ZEB2 via
TGFbeta. Together these facts indicate that ZEB2, occupying the crossroads of
inflammation, aging and carcinogenesis, is an important target for drug
discovery.

PMID: 19424592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2009 Mar;50(3):160-7.

[Role of CtBP-binding transcription factors in leukemogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Morishita K.

PMID: 19352082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Apr 3;4(4):336-47. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.02.015.

Mouse fibroblasts lacking RB1 function form spheres and undergo reprogramming to 
a cancer stem cell phenotype.

Liu Y(1), Clem B, Zuba-Surma EK, El-Naggar S, Telang S, Jenson AB, Wang Y, Shao
H, Ratajczak MZ, Chesney J, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Targets Program, Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville
Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Apr 3;4(4):279-80.

Activation of the RB1 pathway triggers the cell-cycle arrest that mediates
cell-cell contact inhibition. Accordingly, mutation of all three RB1 family
members leads to loss of contact inhibition and outgrowth of fibroblasts into
spheres where cell-cell contacts predominate. We present evidence that such
outgrowth triggers reprogramming to generate cells with properties of cancer stem
cells. Fibroblasts with only a single RB1 mutation remain contact inhibited;
however, if this contact inhibition is bypassed by forcing the RB1(-/-) cells to 
form spheres in suspension, cells with properties of cancer stem cells are also
generated. These cells not only form tumors in nude mice but also generate
differentiated cells. We propose that contact inhibition imposed by the RB1
pathway performs an unexpected tumor suppressor function by preventing cell
outgrowth into structures where cells with properties of cancer stem cells can be
generated from differentiated somatic cells in advancing cancers.

PMCID: PMC2743858
PMID: 19341623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cell Res. 2009 Apr;19(4):487-96. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.34.

BMP-6 inhibits microRNA-21 expression in breast cancer through repressing
deltaEF1 and AP-1.

Du J(1), Yang S, An D, Hu F, Yuan W, Zhai C, Zhu T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Medical College of Nankai University,
94 Weijin Road, Tianjin 300071, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which are small noncoding RNA molecules, play important roles
in the post-transcriptional regulation process. The microRNA-21 gene (miR-21) has
been reported to be highly expressed in various solid tumors, including breast
cancer. Bone morphogenetic protein-6 (BMP-6) has been identified as an inhibitor 
of breast cancer epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through rescuing
E-cadherin expression. We initiated experiments to identify the relationships
between miR-21 and BMP-6 in breast cancer progression. Real-time PCR analysis
showed that miR-21 expression was very high in MDA-MB-231 cells that expressed
little BMP-6. A reverse correlation between BMP-6 and miR-21 was also determined 
in breast cancer tissue samples. Moreover, BMP-6 inhibited miR-21 transcription
in MDA-MB-231 cells. In order to investigate how BMP-6 inhibited the miR-21
promoter (miPPR-21), we constructed a series of miPPR-21 reporters. Luciferase
assay results indicated that BMP-6 inhibited miPPR-21 activity through the E2-box
and AP-1-binding sites. We also demonstrated that both deltaEF1 and TPA induced
miR-21 expression. Using site-directed mutation and CHIP assay, we found that
deltaEF1 induced miPPR-21 activity by binding to the E2-box on miPPR-21.
Moreover, TPA triggered miPPR-21 activity through the AP-1 binding sites. BMP-6
treatment significantly reduced the binding of these factors to miPPR-21 by
decreasing the expression of deltaEF1 and c-Fos/c-Jun. We also demonstrated that 
BMP-6-induced downregulation of miR-21 modified the activity of PDCD4 3'UTR and
inhibited MDA-MB-231 cell invasion. deltaEF1 overexpression and TPA induction
blocked this inhibitory effect of BMP-6. In conclusion, BMP-6-induced inhibition 
of miR-21 suggests that BMP-6 may function as an anti-metastasis factor by a
mechanism involving transcriptional repression of miR-21 in breast cancer.

PMID: 19308091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2009;2(5):411-32. Epub 2009 Jan 10.

Insights into endometrial serous carcinogenesis and progression.

Fadare O(1), Zheng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wilford Hall Medical Center, Lackland Air Force Base 
San Antonio, Texas, USA.

Endometrial serous carcinomas (ESC) constitute only approximately 10% of
endometrial cancers, but have a substantially higher case-fatality rate than
their more common endometrioid counterparts. The precise composite of factors
driving endometrial serous carcinogenesis and progression remain largely unknown,
but we attempt to review the current state of knowledge in this report. ESC
probably do not evolve through a single pathway, and their underlying molecular
events probably occur early in their evolution. TP53 gene mutations occur in 22.7
to 96% of cases, and p53 protein overexpression is seen in approximately 76%. By 
gene expression profiling, p16 is upregulated in ESC significantly above both
normal endometrial cells and endometrioid carcinomas, and 92-100% of cases
display diffuse expression of the p16 protein by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Together, these findings suggest dysregulation of both the p16(INKA)/Cyclin
D-CDK/pRb-E2F and the ARF-MDM2-p53 cell cycle pathways in ESC. By IHC, HER2/neu
is overexpressed (2+ or 3+) in approximately 32.1% of ESC, and approximately
54.5% of cases scored as 2+ or 3+ by IHC display c-erbB2 gene amplification as
assessed by fluorescent in situ hybridization. Genetic instability, typically
manifested as loss of heterozygosity in multiple chromosomes, is a common feature
of ESC, and one study found loss of heterozygosity at 1p32-33 in 63% of cases. A 
subset of ESC display protein expression patterns that are characteristic of high
grade endometrial carcinomas, including loss of the metastasis suppressor CD82
(KAI-1) and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation, the latter manifested as
E-cadherin downregulation, P-cadherin upregulation, and expression of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation-related molecules such as zinc-finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and focal adhesion kinase. Preliminary data
suggests differential patterns of expression in ESC of some isoforms of claudins,
proteases, the tumor invasiveness and progression-associated oncofetal protein
insulin-like growth factor II mRNA-binding protein 3 (IMP3), as well as a variety
of other molecules. At the morphologic level, evidence that indicates that
endometrial glandular dysplasia (EmGD) is the most likely morphologically
recognizable precursor lesion to ESC is presented. We advocate use of the term
endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma (EIC, or its other appellations) only as a 
morphologic descriptor and never as a diagnostic/pathologic statement of biologic
potential. Given its potential for extrauterine extension, we consider the
lesions described as EIC, when present in isolation, as examples of localized
ESC, and patients should be managed as such. Morphologically normal, p53
immunoreactive endometrial cells (the so-called "p53 signatures"), show a
statistically significant association with ESC, display p53 mutations in a
significant subset, and form the start of a progression model, outlined herein,
from p53 signatures to EmGD to localized ESC to the more conventionally invasive 
neoplasm. The identification of a morphologically-recognizable precursor holds
the promise of early detection of ESC, with the attendant reduction in its
overall associated mortality rate. Deciphering the molecular basis for
endometrial serous carcinogenesis should uncover potential targets for diagnosis,
therapy, and/or disease surveillance.

PMCID: PMC2655156
PMID: 19294001  [PubMed]


458. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 13;380(3):614-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.134. Epub 2009 Jan 27.

Troglitazone increases expression of E-cadherin and claudin 4 in human pancreatic
cancer cells.

Kumei S(1), Motomura W, Yoshizaki T, Takakusaki K, Okumura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, midorigaoka-higashi
2-1-1, Asahikawa, Hokkaido 078-8510, Japan.

We examined the effects of troglitazone on expression of E-cadherin and claudin 4
in human pancreatic cancer cells. Troglitazone dose-dependently increased
expression of E-cadherin and claudin 4 mRNA and protein in PK-1 cells. Snail,
Slug and ZEB1, mRNAs were not changed by troglitazone, indicating that these
three transcriptional repressors would not play a role in the induction of
E-cadherin by troglitazone. GW9662, a PPARgamma antagonist, failed to block the
increased expression of E-cadherin or claudin 4 mRNA, suggesting a
PPARgamma-independent pathway. A MEK inhibitor, U0126, increased E-cadherin or
claudin 4 mRNA and protein expression, and potently inhibited cell invasion.
Because troglitazone down-regulates MEK-ERK signaling and inhibit cell invasion
in PK-1 as shown in our previous study, these results suggest that troglitazone
increases expression of E-cadherin and claudin 4 possibly through inhibition of
MEK-ERK signaling in pancreatic cancer cells, which might be involved in the
troglitazone-induced inhibition of cell invasive activity.

PMID: 19285010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 15;69(6):2400-7. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4312. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

Acquisition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype of
gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells is linked with activation of the
notch signaling pathway.

Wang Z(1), Li Y, Kong D, Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Azmi AS, Ali S, Abbruzzese JL,
Gallick GE, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Despite rapid advances in many fronts, pancreatic cancer (PC) remains one of the 
most difficult human malignancies to treat due, in part, to de novo and acquired 
chemoresistance and radioresistance. Gemcitabine alone or in combination with
other conventional therapeutics is the standard of care for the treatment of
advanced PC without any significant improvement in the overall survival of
patients diagnosed with this deadly disease. Previous studies have shown that PC 
cells that are gemcitabine-resistant (GR) acquired epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) phenotype, which is reminiscent of "cancer stem-like cells";
however, the molecular mechanism that led to EMT phenotype has not been fully
investigated. The present study shows that Notch-2 and its ligand, Jagged-1, are 
highly up-regulated in GR cells, which is consistent with the role of the Notch
signaling pathway in the acquisition of EMT and cancer stem-like cell phenotype. 
We also found that the down-regulation of Notch signaling was associated with
decreased invasive behavior of GR cells. Moreover, down-regulation of Notch
signaling by siRNA approach led to partial reversal of the EMT phenotype,
resulting in the mesenchymal-epithelial transition, which was associated with
decreased expression of vimentin, ZEB1, Slug, Snail, and nuclear factor-kappaB.
These results provide molecular evidence showing that the activation of Notch
signaling is mechanistically linked with chemoresistance phenotype (EMT
phenotype) of PC cells, suggesting that the inactivation of Notch signaling by
novel strategies could be a potential targeted therapeutic approach for
overcoming chemoresistance toward the prevention of tumor progression and/or
treatment of metastatic PC.

PMCID: PMC2657919
PMID: 19276344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Apr;20(8):2207-17. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-10-1076. Epub 2009
Feb 18.

ZEB1 enhances transendothelial migration and represses the epithelial phenotype
of prostate cancer cells.

Drake JM(1), Strohbehn G, Bair TB, Moreland JG, Henry MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, 52242, USA.

Metastatic colonization involves cancer cell lodgment or adherence in the
microvasculature and subsequent migration of those cells across the endothelium
into a secondary organ site. To study this process further, we analyzed
transendothelial migration of human PC-3 prostate cancer cells in vitro. We
isolated a subpopulation of cells, TEM4-18, that crossed an endothelial barrier
more efficiently, but surprisingly, were less invasive than parental PC-3 cells
in other contexts in vitro. Importantly, TEM4-18 cells were more aggressive than 
PC-3 cells in a murine metastatic colonization model. Microarray and FACS
analysis of these cells showed that the expression of many genes previously
associated with leukocyte trafficking and cancer cell extravasation were either
unchanged or down-regulated. Instead, TEM4-18 cells exhibited characteristic
molecular markers of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), including
frank loss of E-cadherin expression and up-regulation of the E-cadherin repressor
ZEB1. Silencing ZEB1 in TEM4-18 cells resulted in increased E-cadherin and
reduced transendothelial migration. TEM4-18 cells also express N-cadherin, which 
was found to be necessary, but not sufficient for increased transendothelial
migration. Our results extend the role of EMT in metastasis to transendothelial
migration and implicate ZEB1 and N-cadherin in this process in prostate cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC2669028
PMID: 19225155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4373. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004373. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

ZEB1 links p63 and p73 in a novel neuronal survival pathway rapidly induced in
response to cortical ischemia.

Bui T(1), Sequeira J, Wen TC, Sola A, Higashi Y, Kondoh H, Genetta T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Acute hypoxic/ischemic insults to the forebrain, often resulting in
significant cellular loss of the cortical parenchyma, are a major cause of
debilitating injury in the industrialized world. A clearer understanding of the
pro-death/pro-survival signaling pathways and their downstream targets is
critical to the development of therapeutic interventions to mitigate permanent
neurological damage.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrate here that the transcriptional
repressor ZEB1, thought to be involved in regulating the timing and spatial
boundaries of basic-Helix-Loop-Helix transactivator-mediated neurogenic
determination/differentiation programs, functions to link a pro-survival
transcriptional cascade rapidly induced in cortical neurons in response to
experimentally induced ischemia. Employing histological, tissue culture, and
molecular biological read-outs, we show that this novel pro-survival response,
initiated through the rapid induction of p63, is mediated ultimately by the
transcriptional repression of a pro-apoptotic isoform of p73 by ZEB1. We show
further that this phylogenetically conserved pathway is induced as well in the
human cortex subjected to episodes of clinically relevant stroke.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The data presented here provide the first evidence that
ZEB1 induction is part of a protective response by neurons to ischemia. The
stroke-induced increase in ZEB1 mRNA and protein levels in cortical neurons is
both developmentally and phylogenetically conserved and may therefore be part of 
a fundamental cellular response to this insult. Beyond the context of stroke, the
finding that ZEB1 is regulated by a member of the p53 family has implications for
cell survival in other tissue and cellular environments subjected to ischemia,
such as the myocardium and, in particular, tumor masses.

PMCID: PMC2632749
PMID: 19194497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. RNA Biol. 2008 Jul-Sep;5(3):115-9.

The emerging role of miR-200 family of microRNAs in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and cancer metastasis.

Korpal M(1), Kang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play essential roles in many physiological and pathological
processes, including tumor development, by regulating the expression of a
plethora of mRNAs. Although the importance of miRNAs in tumorigenesis is well
established, only recently have reports elucidated miRNAs as promoters or
suppressors of metastasis. The miR-200 family has been shown to inhibit the
initiating step of metastasis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), by
maintaining the epithelial phenotype through direct targeting of transcriptional 
repressors of E-cadherin, ZEB1 and ZEB2. These findings shed light into a
miRNA-mediated regulatory pathway that influences EMT in a developmentally and
pathologically relevant setting.

PMCID: PMC3532896
PMID: 19182522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Int Immunol. 2009 Mar;21(3):227-35. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn143. Epub 2009 Jan 30.

The transcription repressor, ZEB1, cooperates with CtBP2 and HDAC1 to suppress
IL-2 gene activation in T cells.

Wang J(1), Lee S, Teh CE, Bunting K, Ma L, Shannon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601 Australia.

Activation of T cells leads to the induction of many cytokine genes that are
required for appropriate immune responses, including IL-2, a key cytokine for T
cell proliferation and homeostasis. The activating transcription factors such as 
nuclear factor of activated T cells, nuclear factor kappaB/Rel and activated
protein-1 family members that regulate inducible IL-2 gene expression have been
well documented. However, negative regulation of the IL-2 gene is less studied.
Here we examine the role of zinc finger E-box-binding protein (ZEB) 1, a
homeodomain/Zn finger transcription factor, as a repressor of IL-2 gene
transcription. We show here that ZEB1 is expressed in non-stimulated and
stimulated T cells and using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we show that
ZEB1 binds to the IL-2 promoter. Over-expression of ZEB1 can repress IL-2
promoter activity, as well as endogenous IL-2 mRNA production in EL-4 T cells,
and this repression is dependent on the ZEB-binding site at -100. ZEB1 cooperates
with the co-repressor C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP) 2 and with histone
deacetylase 1 to repress the IL-2 promoter and this cooperation depends on the
ZEB-binding site in the promoter as well as the Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser protein-protein
interaction domain in CtBP2. Thus, ZEB1 may function to recruit a repressor
complex to the IL-2 promoter.

PMID: 19181930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Neoplasia. 2009 Feb;11(2):157-66.

ZEB-1, a repressor of the semaphorin 3F tumor suppressor gene in lung cancer
cells.

Clarhaut J(1), Gemmill RM, Potiron VA, Ait-Si-Ali S, Imbert J, Drabkin HA, Roche 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Physiologie et Biologie Cellulaires, Université de Poitiers, CNRS,
40 avenue du Recteur Pineau, F-86022, Poitiers cédex, France.

SEMA3F is a secreted semaphorin with potent antitumor activity, which is
frequently downregulated in lung cancer. In cancer cell lines, SEMA3F
overexpression decreases hypoxia-induced factor 1alpha protein and vascular
endothelial growth factor mRNA, and inhibits multiple signaling components.
Therefore, understanding how SEMA3F expression is inhibited in cancer cells is
important. We previously defined the promoter organization of SEMA3F and found
that chromatin remodeling by a histone deacetylase inhibitor was sufficient to
activate SEMA3F expression. In lung cancer, we have also shown that ZEB-1, an
E-box transcription repressor, is predominantly responsible for loss of
E-Cadherin associated with a poor prognosis and resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitors. In the present study, we demonstrated that ZEB-1 also
inhibits SEMA3F in lung cancer cells. Levels of ZEB-1, but not ZEB-2, Snail or
Slug, significantly correlate with SEMA3F inhibition, and overexpression or
inhibition of ZEB-1 correspondingly affected SEMA3F expression. Four conserved
E-box sites were identified in the SEMA3F gene. Direct ZEB-1 binding was
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays for two of these, and ZEB-1
binding was reduced when cells were treated with a histone deacetylase inhibitor.
These results demonstrate that ZEB-1 directly inhibits SEMA3F expression in lung 
cancer cells. SEMA3F loss was associated with changes in cell signaling:
increased phospho-AKT in normoxia and increase of hypoxia-induced factor 1alpha
protein in hypoxia. Moreover, exogenous addition of SEMA3F could modulate
ZEB-1-induced angiogenesis in a chorioallantoic membrane assay. Together, these
data provide further support for the importance of SEMA3F and ZEB-1 in lung
cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2631140
PMID: 19177200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2009 Jun;28(1-2):151-66. doi: 10.1007/s10555-008-9179-y.

E-cadherin, beta-catenin, and ZEB1 in malignant progression of cancer.

Schmalhofer O(1), Brabletz S, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55,
79106, Freiburg, Germany.

The embryonic program 'epithelial-mesenchymal transition' (EMT) is activated
during tumor invasion in disseminating cancer cells. Characteristic to these
cells is a loss of E-cadherin expression, which can be mediated by EMT-inducing
transcriptional repressors, e.g. ZEB1. Consequences of a loss of E-cadherin are
an impairment of cell-cell adhesion, which allows detachment of cells, and
nuclear localization of beta-catenin. In addition to an accumulation of cancer
stem cells, nuclear beta-catenin induces a gene expression pattern favoring tumor
invasion, and mounting evidence indicates multiple reciprocal interactions of
E-cadherin and beta-catenin with EMT-inducing transcriptional repressors to
stabilize an invasive mesenchymal phenotype of epithelial tumor cells.

PMID: 19153669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 15;15(2):532-42. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1733.

Delta-crystallin enhancer binding factor 1 controls the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition phenotype and resistance to the epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibitor erlotinib in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma lines.

Haddad Y(1), Choi W, McConkey DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: Although the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in
a majority of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC), only a minority of 
patients derive substantial clinical benefit from EGFR inhibitors. We initiated
the present study to identify the mechanisms underlying erlotinib resistance in a
panel of HNSCC cell lines.
METHODS: We used [(3)H]thymidine incorporation to characterize the heterogeneity 
of responsiveness to erlotinib-mediated growth inhibition in a panel of 27 human 
HNSCC cells. We characterized the molecular mechanisms involved in resistance
using a representative subset of six erlotinib-sensitive and erlotinib-resistant 
HNSCC lines.
RESULTS: Erlotinib had heterogeneous effects on DNA synthesis in HNSCC cells that
correlated closely with molecular markers of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Specifically, the drug-sensitive lines expressed high levels of E-cadherin
and showed limited invasion and migration capabilities. In contrast, the
erlotinib-resistant HNSCC lines expressed high levels of the E-cadherin repressor
delta-crystallin enhancer binding factor 1 (deltaEF1; Zeb-1) and other
mesenchymal markers and low levels of E-cadherin, and they were highly invasive
and migratory. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of deltaEF1 in the
erlotinib-resistant cell lines (1386LN and UMSCC1) resulted in up-regulation of
E-cadherin and increased sensitivity to erlotinib in an E-cadherin-dependent
manner.
CONCLUSIONS: DeltaEF1 controls the mesenchymal phenotype and drives erlotinib
resistance in HNSCC cells. E-cadherin and deltaEF1 may prove to be useful markers
in predicting EGFR inhibitor responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC2729136
PMID: 19147758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. FEBS Lett. 2009 Jan 22;583(2):430-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.12.042. Epub
2008 Dec 29.

Zeb1-mediated T-cadherin repression increases the invasive potential of
gallbladder cancer.

Adachi Y(1), Takeuchi T, Nagayama T, Ohtsuki Y, Furihata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kochi Medical School, Nankoku, Kochi 783-8505, Japan.

Here, we report that the transcriptional regulator Zeb1 repressed the
transcription of T-cadherin, to increase the invasive activity of gallbladder
cancer cells. Zeb1 physically bound to the promoter of T-cadherin, repressed
promoter activity in E-box-like sequence-dependent fashion, and suppressed
T-cadherin expression. In gallbladder cancer tissues, Zeb1 was expressed at the
cancer invasion front, whereas T-cadherin was exclusively expressed in
non-invasive foci. Collagen gel invasion assay showed that T-cadherin was a
negative regulator for gallbladder cancer invasion. These findings suggest that
Zeb1 represses T-cadherin expression and thus increases the invasive activity of 
gallbladder cancer.

PMID: 19116147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Feb 6;379(2):510-3. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.12.101. Epub 2008 Dec 29.

Transcription factor 8 activates R-Ras to regulate angiogenesis.

Inuzuka T(1), Tsuda M, Kawaguchi H, Ohba Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathophysiology and Signal Transduction, Hokkaido University,
Graduate School of Medicine, N15W7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

We have recently reported that transcription factor 8 (TCF8) negatively regulates
pathological angiogenesis by regulating endothelial invasiveness by acting as a
transcriptional attenuator of matrix metalloproteinase 1. TCF8 also modulates
cell-matrix and cell-cell adhesion; however molecular mechanism of this TCF8
function remains obscure. Here, we provide evidence that TCF8 activates R-Ras,
another class of angiogenic regulator, to suppress angiogenesis by a mechanism
other than a transcriptional attenuator. Tube formation by human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) facilitated by TCF8 suppression was significantly
inhibited by the expression of constitutive active mutant of R-Ras. When we
examined the mRNA expression levels of R-Ras regulators, no significant changes
were observed to explain the R-Ras activation by TCF8. Interestingly, we found
that TCF8 bound to CalDAG-GEFIII, an R-Ras activator, in the cytosol, indicating 
that TCF8 emanates signaling for R-Ras activation from cytosol to regulate
angiogenesis negatively.

PMID: 19116136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(6):R105. doi: 10.1186/bcr2210. Epub 2008 Dec 16.

Proteomic analysis of tumor necrosis factor-alpha resistant human breast cancer
cells reveals a MEK5/Erk5-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype.

Zhou C(1), Nitschke AM, Xiong W, Zhang Q, Tang Y, Bloch M, Elliott S, Zhu Y,
Bazzone L, Yu D, Weldon CB, Schiff R, McLachlan JA, Beckman BS, Wiese TE, Nephew 
KP, Shan B, Burow ME, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA
70125, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Despite intensive study of the mechanisms of chemotherapeutic drug 
resistance in human breast cancer, few reports have systematically investigated
the mechanisms that underlie resistance to the chemotherapy-sensitizing agent
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha. Additionally, the relationship between
TNF-alpha resistance mediated by MEK5/Erk5 signaling and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a process associated with promotion of invasion, metastasis,
and recurrence in breast cancer, has not previously been investigated.
METHODS: To compare differences in the proteome of the TNF-alpha resistant MCF-7 
breast cancer cell line MCF-7-MEK5 (in which TNF-alpha resistance is mediated by 
MEK5/Erk5 signaling) and its parental TNF-a sensitive MCF-7 cell line MCF-7-VEC, 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and high performance capillary liquid
chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry approaches were used.
Differential protein expression was verified at the transcriptional level using
RT-PCR assays. An EMT phenotype was confirmed using immunofluorescence staining
and gene expression analyses. A short hairpin RNA strategy targeting Erk5 was
utilized to investigate the requirement for the MEK/Erk5 pathway in EMT.
RESULTS: Proteomic analyses and PCR assays were used to identify and confirm
differential expression of proteins. In MCF-7-MEK5 versus MCF-7-VEC cells,
vimentin (VIM), glutathione-S-transferase P (GSTP1), and creatine kinase B-type
(CKB) were upregulated, and keratin 8 (KRT8), keratin 19 (KRT19) and
glutathione-S-transferase Mu 3 (GSTM3) were downregulated. Morphology and
immunofluorescence staining for E-cadherin and vimentin revealed an EMT phenotype
in the MCF-7-MEK5 cells. Furthermore, EMT regulatory genes SNAI2 (slug), ZEB1
(delta-EF1), and N-cadherin (CDH2) were upregulated, whereas E-cadherin (CDH1)
was downregulated in MCF-7-MEK5 cells versus MCF-7-VEC cells. RNA interference
targeting of Erk5 reversed MEK5-mediated EMT gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that MEK5 over-expression promotes a
TNF-alpha resistance phenotype associated with distinct proteomic changes
(upregulation of VIM/vim, GSTP1/gstp1, and CKB/ckb; and downregulation of
KRT8/krt8, KRT19/krt19, and GSTM3/gstm3). We further demonstrate that
MEK5-mediated progression to an EMT phenotype is dependent upon intact Erk5 and
associated with upregulation of SNAI2 and ZEB1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2656902
PMID: 19087274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009 Mar;66(5):773-87. doi: 10.1007/s00018-008-8465-8.

The role of the ZEB family of transcription factors in development and disease.

Vandewalle C(1), Van Roy F, Berx G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department for Molecular Biomedical
Research, Ghent University, Technologiepark 927, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.

The ZEB family of zinc finger transcription factors are essential players during 
normal embryonic development. One characteristic is that they induce epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process that reorganizes epithelial cells to
become migratory mesenchymal cells. E-cadherin is a major target gene of these
transcriptional repressors, and this downregulation is considered a hallmark of
EMT. In recent years, the involvement of the ZEB proteins in pathological
contexts has been documented as well. Mutations in ZEB encoding genes cause
severe syndromic malformations and evidence is mounting that links these factors 
to malignant tumor progression. In this review, we describe what is currently
known on the molecular pathways these transcription factors are implicated in,
and we highlight their roles in development and human diseases, with a focus on
tumor malignancy.

PMID: 19011757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Gen Virol. 2008 Dec;89(Pt 12):2998-3003. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/003103-0.

Negative modulation of the chicken infectious anemia virus promoter by COUP-TF1
and an E box-like element at the transcription start site binding deltaEF1.

Miller MM(1), Jarosinski KW, Schat KA.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Avian Health, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) under control of the
promoter-enhancer of chicken infectious anemia virus (CAV) is increased in an
oestrogen receptor-enhanced cell line when treated with oestrogen and the
promoter-enhancer binds unidentified proteins that recognize a consensus
oestrogen response element (ERE). Co-transfection assays with the CAV promoter
and the nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor
1 (COUP-TF1) showed that expression of EGFP was decreased by 50 to 60 % in DF-1
and LMH cells. The CAV promoter that included sequences at and downstream of the 
transcription start point had less expression than a short promoter construct.
Mutation of a putative E box at this site restored expression levels.
Electromobility shift assays showed that the transcription regulator delta-EF1
(deltaEF1) binds to this E box region. These findings indicate that the CAV
promoter activity can be affected directly or indirectly by COUP-TF1 and
deltaEF1.

PMID: 19008385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cell Cycle. 2008 Oct;7(20):3112-8. Epub 2008 Oct 25.

MicroRNAs as regulators of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Gregory PA(1), Bracken CP, Bert AG, Goodall GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Institute, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. philip.gregory@imvs.sa.gov.au

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) describes the molecular reprogramming and
phenotypic changes involved in the conversion of polarised immotile epithelial
cells to motile mesenchymal cells. This process allows the remodelling of tissues
during embryonic development and is implicated in the promotion of tumor invasion
and metastasis. Several recent studies have identified the miR-200 family and
miR-205 as key regulators of EMT and enforcers of the epithelial phenotype. The
miR-200 family participates in a signalling network with the E-cadherin
transcriptional repressors ZEB1/deltaEF1 and ZEB2/SIP1, and TGFbeta2 that is
postulated to facilitate maintenance of stable epithelial or mesenchymal states
but also allow reversible switching between these states in response to EMT
effectors (such as TGFbeta). This review summarises these recent findings and
their implications in both developmental EMT and tumor progression.

PMID: 18927505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. ScientificWorldJournal. 2008 Sep 21;8:901-4. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2008.115.

The microRNA-200 family regulates epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Paterson EL(1), Kolesnikoff N, Gregory PA, Bert AG, Khew-Goodall Y, Goodall GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Institute and Division of Human Immunology, Institute of Medical and
Veterinary Science, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia. emily.paterson@imvs.sa.gov.au

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is implicated in metastasis initiation
and has recently been shown to be regulated by the miRNA-200 family and miR-205. 
Expression of these miRNAs was lost in invasive breast cancer cell lines
displaying mesenchymal-like morphology suggesting these microRNAs may play a role
in cancer metastasis.

PMID: 18836656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;68(19):7846-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1942.

A double-negative feedback loop between ZEB1-SIP1 and the microRNA-200 family
regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Bracken CP(1), Gregory PA, Kolesnikoff N, Bert AG, Wang J, Shannon MF, Goodall
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Institute, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, The University 
of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition occurs during embryologic development to
allow tissue remodeling and is proposed to be a key step in the metastasis of
epithelial-derived tumors. The miR-200 family of microRNAs plays a major role in 
specifying the epithelial phenotype by preventing expression of the transcription
repressors, ZEB1/deltaEF1 and SIP1/ZEB2. We show here that miR-200a, miR-200b,
and the related miR-429 are all encoded on a 7.5-kb polycistronic primary miRNA
(pri-miR) transcript. We show that the promoter for the pri-miR is located within
a 300-bp segment located 4 kb upstream of miR-200b. This promoter region is
sufficient to confer expression in epithelial cells and is repressed in
mesenchymal cells by ZEB1 and SIP1 through their binding to a conserved pair of
ZEB-type E-box elements located proximal to the transcription start site. These
findings establish a double-negative feedback loop controlling ZEB1-SIP1 and
miR-200 family expression that regulates cellular phenotype and has direct
relevance to the role of these factors in tumor progression.

PMID: 18829540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):2737-47. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21685.

Integrin-linked kinase regulates E-cadherin expression through PARP-1.

McPhee TR(1), McDonald PC, Oloumi A, Dedhar S.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Graduate Program, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Repression of E-cadherin expression by the transcription factor, Snail, is
implicated in epithelial to mesenchymal transition and cancer progression. We
show here that Integrin-Linked Kinase (ILK) regulates E-cadherin expression
through Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1). ILK overexpression in Scp2 cells 
resulted in stimulation of Snail expression and loss of E-cadherin expression.
Silencing of ILK, Akt or Snail resulted in re-expression of E-cadherin in PC3
cells. To elucidate the signaling pathway downstream of ILK, we identified
candidate Snail promoter ILK Responsive Element (SIRE) binding proteins. PARP-1
was identified as a SIRE-binding protein. ILK silencing inhibited binding of
PARP-1 to SIRE. PARP-1 silencing resulted in inhibition of Snail and ZEB1,
leading to up-regulation of E-cadherin. We suggest a model in which ILK represses
E-cadherin expression by regulating PARP-1, leading to the binding of PARP-1 to
SIRE and modulation of Snail expression.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18773488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):271-5.

Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and miRNA (review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-003, Japan.

SHH, IHH, and DHH are lipid-modified secreted proteins binding to Patched
receptors, and CDON, BOC or GAS1 co-receptors. In the absence of Hedgehog
signaling, GLI1 is transcriptionally repressed, GLI2 is phosphorylated by GSK3
and CK1 for the FBXW11 (betaTRCP2)-mediated degradation, and GLI3 is processed to
a cleaved repressor. In the presence of Hedgehog signaling, Smoothened is
relieved from Patched-mediated suppression due to the Hedgehog-dependent
internalization of Patched, which leads to MAP3K10 (MST) activation and SUFU
inactivation for the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of GLI family
members. GLI activators then upregulate CCND1, CCND2 for cell cycle acceleration,
FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXP3, POU3F1, RUNX2, SOX13, TBX2 for cell
fate determination, JAG2, INHBC, and INHBE for stem cell signaling regulation.
Hedgehog signals also upregulate SFRP1 in mesenchymal cells for WNT signaling
regulation. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during embryogenesis,
adult tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis is characterized by class switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin. SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), SNAI3, ZEB1, ZEB2 (SIP1), 
KLF8, TWIST1, and TWIST2 are EMT regulators repressing CDH1 gene encoding
E-cadherin. Hedgehog signals induce JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSL-mediated
SNAI1 upregulation, and also induce TGFbeta1 secretion for ZEB1 and ZEB2
upregulation via TGFbeta receptor and NF-kappaB. TGFbeta-mediated downregulation 
of miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR-429 results in
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly 
leads to EMT through FGF, Notch, TGFbeta signaling cascades, and miRNA regulatory
networks. miRNAs targeted to stem cell signaling components or EMT regulators are
potent drug targets; however, off-target effects should be strictly controlled
before clinical application of synthetic miRNA. Peptide mimetic and RNA aptamer
could also be utilized as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors or EMT suppressors.

PMID: 18698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Nov;318(1-2):89-99. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9860-z. Epub
2008 Jul 12.

Expression of the ZEB1 (deltaEF1) transcription factor in human: additional
insights.

Hurt EM(1), Saykally JN, Anose BM, Kalli KR, Sanders MM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute at Frederick, National Institutes of Health, 
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

The zinc finger E-box binding transcription factor ZEB1
(deltaEF1/Nil-2-a/AREB6/zfhx1a/TCF8/zfhep/BZP) is emerging as an important
regulator of the epithelial to mesenchymal transitions (EMT) required for
development and cancer metastasis. ZEB1 promotes EMT by repressing genes
contributing to the epithelial phenotype while activating those associated with
the mesenchymal phenotype. TCF8 (zfhx1a), the gene encoding ZEB1, is induced by
several potentially oncogenic ligands including TGF-beta, estrogen, and
progesterone. TGF-beta appears to activate EMT, at least in part, by inducing
ZEB1. However, our understanding of how ZEB1 contributes to signaling pathways
elicited by estrogen and progesterone is quite limited, as is our understanding
of its functional roles in normal adult tissues. To begin to address these
questions, a human tissue mRNA array analysis was done. In adults, the highest
ZEB1 mRNA expression is in bladder and uterus, whereas in the fetus highest
expression is in lung, thymus, and heart. To further investigate the regulation
of TCF8 by estrogen, ZEB1 mRNA was measured in ten estrogen-responsive cell
lines, but it is only induced in the OV266 ovarian carcinoma line. Although high 
expression of ZEB1 mRNA is estrogen-dependent in normal human ovarian and
endometrial biopsies, high expression is estrogen-independent in late stage
ovarian and endometrial carcinomas, raising the possibility that deregulated
expression promotes cancer progression. In contrast, TCF8 is at least partially
deleted in 4 of 5 well-differentiated, grade I endometrial carcinomas, which may 
contribute to their non-aggressive phenotype. These data support the contention
that high ZEB1 encourages gynecologic carcinoma progression.

PMID: 18622689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Trends Cell Biol. 2008 Aug;18(8):357-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2008.05.005. Epub 2008
Jun 26.

Non-coding RNAs take centre stage in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Cano A(1), Nieto MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica UAM, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
Alberto Sols CSIC-UAM Arturo Duperier 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain. acano@iib.uam.es

Noncoding RNAs are emerging as central players in gene expression regulation
through the targeting of a plethora of mRNAs. Several recent papers report on the
regulation of the epithelial phenotype by the miR-200 (200 family of miRNAs)
family and a natural antisense transcript, both acting on the E-cadherin
repressors zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox factors ZEB1 and ZEB2. These
findings open new avenues for understanding the modulation of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in physiological and pathological
situations.

PMID: 18585040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Aug;28(15):4772-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00323-08. Epub 2008 Jun 
2.

Polycomb complex 2 is required for E-cadherin repression by the Snail1
transcription factor.

Herranz N(1), Pasini D, Díaz VM, Francí C, Gutierrez A, Dave N, Escrivà M,
Hernandez-Muñoz I, Di Croce L, Helin K, García de Herreros A, Peiró S.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Recerca en Càncer, IMIM-Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcriptional factor Snail1 is a repressor of E-cadherin (CDH1) gene
expression essential for triggering epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Snail1
represses CDH1, directly binding its promoter and inducing the synthesis of the
Zeb1 repressor. In this article, we show that repression of CDH1 by Snail1, but
not by Zeb1, is dependent on the activity of Polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2). Embryonic stem (ES) cells null for Suz12, one of the components of PRC2, 
show higher levels of Cdh1 mRNA than control ES cells. In tumor cells,
interference of PRC2 activity prevents the ability of Snail1 to downregulate CDH1
and partially derepresses CDH1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
that Snail1 increases the binding of Suz12 to the CDH1 promoter and the
trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone H3. Moreover, Snail1 interacts with Suz12 
and Ezh2, as shown by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. In conclusion, these
results demonstrate that Snail1 recruits PRC2 to the CDH1 promoter and requires
the activity of this complex to repress E-cadherin expression.

PMCID: PMC2493371
PMID: 18519590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2008;617:541-6. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-69080-3_55.

Characterization of androgen regulation of ZEB-1 and PSA in 22RV1 prostate cancer
cells.

Anose BM(1), LaGoo L, Schwendinger J.

Author information: 
(1)Bethel University, St. Paul, MN, USA.

Two-thirds of patients who present with metastatic prostate cancer (PC) are dead 
within 5 years of diagnosis. The comparable survival rate for patients with
localized disease is 100%, which clearly stresses the need for pursuing and
developing bioassays that allow prediction of which localized cases are most
likely to metastasize. The commonly assayed prostate specific antigen (PSA),
while touted as a transformation biomarker, has recently proven to be problematic
in the area of false positive diagnoses. It remains, however, a hallmark gene for
studying androgen regulation as its expression is reliably stimulated by
androgens such as dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Herein, we have elucidated the
effects of flutamide (a defined anti-androgen) and DHT on the expression of PSA
and Zinc finger E-box Binding factor (ZEB-1). Additionally, we assayed the
androgenic capabilities of two DHT derivatives on expression of PSA. Our previous
research had identified ZEB-1 as a putative biomarker for the onset of metastasis
in prostate cancer. The expression of this gene is regulated by androgen and
decreases sharply at metastasis. In the current study, the effects of 1 and 10 nM
flutamide, in combination with 1 and 10 nM DHT, on expression of ZEB-1 and PSA,
were investigated in 22Rv1, an androgen-responsive human PC cell line. Also in
this cell line, the effects of testosterone propionate and dehydroisoandrosterone
were studied. Our research confirmed the feasibility of considering ZEB-1 a
metastatic PCa biomarker, using the highly sensitive technique of real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Interestingly, it also revealed the danger of
using flutamide as a therapeutic antagonist, as we demonstrate herein its
alarming capability to behave as an agonist.

PMID: 18497080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mod Pathol. 2008 Jul;21(7):912-23. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.82. Epub 2008 May 
16.

ZEB1 expression in type I vs type II endometrial cancers: a marker of aggressive 
disease.

Singh M(1), Spoelstra NS, Jean A, Howe E, Torkko KC, Clark HR, Darling DS,
Shroyer KR, Horwitz KB, Broaddus RR, Richer JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a transcription factor containing 
two clusters of Kruppel-type zinc-fingers, by which it binds E-box-like sequences
on target DNAs. A role for ZEB1 in tumor progression, specifically, epithelial to
mesenchymal transitions, has recently been revealed. ZEB1 acts as a master
repressor of E-cadherin and other epithelial markers. We previously demonstrated 
that ZEB1 is confined to the stromal compartment in normal endometrium and
low-grade endometrial cancers. Here, we quantify ZEB1 protein expression in
endometrial samples from 88 patients and confirm that it is expressed at
significantly higher levels in the tumor-associated stroma of low-grade
endometrioid adenocarcinomas (type I endometrial cancers) compared to
hyperplastic or normal endometrium. In addition, as we previously reported, ZEB1 
is aberrantly expressed in the epithelial-derived tumor cells of highly
aggressive endometrial cancers, such as FIGO grade 3 endometrioid
adenocarcinomas, uterine serous carcinomas, and malignant mixed Müllerian tumors 
(classified as type II endometrial cancers). We now demonstrate, in both human
endometrial cancer specimens and cell lines, that when ZEB1 is inappropriately
expressed in epithelial-derived tumor cells, E-cadherin expression is repressed, 
and that this inverse relationship correlates with increased migratory and
invasive potential. Forced expression of ZEB1 in the nonmigratory, low-grade,
relatively differentiated Ishikawa cell line renders them migratory. Conversely, 
reduction of ZEB1 in a highly migratory and aggressive type II cell line,
Hec50co, results in reduced migratory capacity. Thus, ZEB1 may be a biomarker of 
aggressive endometrial cancers at high risk of recurrence. It may help identify
women who would most benefit from chemotherapy. Furthermore, if expression of
ZEB1 in type II endometrial cancers could be reversed, it might be exploited as
therapy for these highly aggressive tumors.

PMID: 18487993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. EMBO Rep. 2008 Jun;9(6):582-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.74. Epub 2008 May 16.

A reciprocal repression between ZEB1 and members of the miR-200 family promotes
EMT and invasion in cancer cells.

Burk U(1), Schubert J, Wellner U, Schmalhofer O, Vincan E, Spaderna S, Brabletz
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55,
79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2008 Jun;9(6):521-2.

The embryonic programme 'epithelial-mesenchymal transition' (EMT) is thought to
promote malignant tumour progression. The transcriptional repressor zinc-finger
E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) is a crucial inducer of EMT in various human
tumours, and was recently shown to promote invasion and metastasis of tumour
cells. Here, we report that ZEB1 directly suppresses transcription of
microRNA-200 family members miR-141 and miR-200c, which strongly activate
epithelial differentiation in pancreatic, colorectal and breast cancer cells.
Notably, the EMT activators transforming growth factor beta2 and ZEB1 are the
predominant targets downregulated by these microRNAs. These results indicate that
ZEB1 triggers an microRNA-mediated feedforward loop that stabilizes EMT and
promotes invasion of cancer cells. Alternatively, depending on the environmental 
trigger, this loop might switch and induce epithelial differentiation, and thus
explain the strong intratumorous heterogeneity observed in many human cancers.

PMCID: PMC2396950
PMID: 18483486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. EMBO Rep. 2008 Jun;9(6):521-2. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.84. Epub 2008 May 16.

A new regulatory loop in cancer-cell invasion.

Ocaña OH(1), Nieto MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante, CSIC-UMH, Apartado 18, San Juan de
Alicante 03550, Spain.

Comment on
    EMBO Rep. 2008 Jun;9(6):582-9.

PMCID: PMC2427387
PMID: 18483485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Blood. 2008 Jul 15;112(2):383-93. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-131185. Epub 2008
May 8.

Down-regulation of TCF8 is involved in the leukemogenesis of adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma.

Hidaka T(1), Nakahata S, Hatakeyama K, Hamasaki M, Yamashita K, Kohno T, Arai Y, 
Taki T, Nishida K, Okayama A, Asada Y, Yamaguchi R, Tsubouchi H, Yokota J,
Taniwaki M, Higashi Y, Morishita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor and Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.

Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) is caused by latent human T-lymphotropic
virus-1 (HTLV-1) infection. To clarify the molecular mechanism underlying
leukemogenesis after viral infection, we precisely mapped 605 chromosomal
breakpoints in 61 ATLL cases by spectral karyotyping and identified frequent
chromosomal breakpoints in 10p11, 14q11, and 14q32. Single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) array-comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), genetic, and
expression analyses of the genes mapped within a common breakpoint cluster region
in 10p11.2 revealed that in ATLL cells, transcription factor 8 (TCF8) was
frequently disrupted by several mechanisms, including mainly epigenetic
dysregulation. TCF8 mutant mice frequently developed invasive CD4(+) T-cell
lymphomas in the thymus or in ascitic fluid in vivo. Down-regulation of TCF8
expression in ATLL cells in vitro was associated with resistance to transforming 
growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), a well-known characteristic of ATLL cells,
suggesting that escape from TGF-beta1-mediated growth inhibition is important in 
the pathogenesis of ATLL. These findings indicate that TCF8 has a tumor
suppressor role in ATLL.

PMID: 18467597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 May;49(5):1843-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-0789.

Zeb1 mutant mice as a model of posterior corneal dystrophy.

Liu Y(1), Peng X, Tan J, Darling DS, Kaplan HJ, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville
Health Sciences Center, 301 E. Muhammad Ali Boulevard, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

PURPOSE: The zinc finger transcription factor Zeb1 binds to E-box-like sequences 
and is important for maintaining repression of epithelial specification genes in 
vivo. Overexpression of Zeb1 in cancer triggers epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, which facilitates metastasis. The mutation of ZEB1 in humans is
linked to posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD), in which an epithelial
transition of the corneal endothelium is associated with abnormal endothelial
proliferation. The purpose of this study is to determine whether Zeb1 null or
heterozygous mice may provide an animal model for PPCD.
METHODS: Corneal morphology, protein and mRNA expression, and cell proliferation 
were compared in wild-type and Zeb1 gene knockout mice by immunostaining,
real-time PCR, and BrdU incorporation. mRNA expression in isolated embryo
fibroblasts derived from wild-type, Zeb1 heterozygous, and null mice was analyzed
by real-time PCR RESULTS: Zeb1 null mice late in gestation show ectopic
expression of epithelial genes in the corneal endothelium and keratocytes,
including the basement membrane component COL4A3, which is ectopically expressed 
by the corneal endothelium in PPCD. These embryos also show abnormal corneal
endothelial and keratocyte proliferation, corneal thickening, and
corneolenticular and iridocorneal adhesions. Adult Zeb1 heterozygous mice exhibit
these same corneal defects. The ectopic expression of epithelial genes extended
to embryonic fibroblasts derived from Zeb1 heterozygous and null mice, suggesting
that Zeb1 may have a more general role in the suppression of an epithelial
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors conclude that Zeb1 heterozygous and null mice show
features of PPCD and thus should provide an animal model for genetic dissection
of pathways contributing to the disease.

PMCID: PMC2504018
PMID: 18436818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 30;283(22):14910-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C800074200. Epub 2008 
Apr 14.

The miR-200 family inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer cell
migration by direct targeting of E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and
ZEB2.

Korpal M(1), Lee ES, Hu G, Kang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNA molecules that can regulate gene expression by
interacting with multiple mRNAs and inducing either translation suppression or
degradation of mRNA. Recently, several miRNAs were identified as either promoters
or suppressors of metastasis. However, it is unclear in which step(s) of the
multistep metastatic cascade these miRNAs play a defined functional role. To
study the functional importance of miRNAs in epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), a process thought to initiate metastasis by enhancing the motility of
tumor cells, we used a well established in vitro EMT assay: transforming growth
factor-beta-induced EMT in NMuMG murine mammary epithelial cells. We found that
members of the miR-200 family, organized as two clusters in the genome, were
repressed during EMT. Overexpression of each miRNA individually or as clusters in
NMuMG cells hindered EMT by enhancing E-cadherin expression through direct
targeting of ZEB1 and ZEB2, which encode transcriptional repressors of
E-cadherin. In the 4TO7 mouse carcinoma cell line, which expresses low levels of 
endogenous E-cadherin and displays a mesenchymal phenotype, ectopic expression of
the miR-200 family miRNAs significantly increased E-cadherin expression and
altered cell morphology to an epithelial phenotype. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of each miR-200 miRNA cluster significantly reduced the in vitro
motility of 4TO7 cells in migration assays. These results suggested that loss of 
expression of the miR-200 family members may play a critical role in the
repression of E-cadherin by ZEB1 and ZEB2 during EMT, thereby enhancing migration
and invasion during cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3258899
PMID: 18411277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Genes Dev. 2008 Apr 1;22(7):894-907. doi: 10.1101/gad.1640608.

The miR-200 family determines the epithelial phenotype of cancer cells by
targeting the E-cadherin repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2.

Park SM(1), Gaur AB, Lengyel E, Peter ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2009 Jun 1;23(11):1378.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 May;136(5):1835-7.

Cancer progression has similarities with the process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) found during embryonic development, during which cells
down-regulate E-cadherin and up-regulate Vimentin expression. By evaluating the
expression of 207 microRNAs (miRNAs) in the 60 cell lines of the drug screening
panel maintained by the Nation Cancer Institute, we identified the miR-200 miRNA 
family as an extraordinary marker for cells that express E-cadherin but lack
expression of Vimentin. These findings were extended to primary ovarian cancer
specimens. miR-200 was found to directly target the mRNA of the E-cadherin
transcriptional repressors ZEB1 (TCF8/deltaEF1) and ZEB2 (SMAD-interacting
protein 1 [SIP1]/ZFXH1B). Ectopic expression of miR-200 caused up-regulation of
E-cadherin in cancer cell lines and reduced their motility. Conversely,
inhibition of miR-200 reduced E-cadherin expression, increased expression of
Vimentin, and induced EMT. Our data identify miR-200 as a powerful marker and
determining factor of the epithelial phenotype of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2279201
PMID: 18381893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2479-88. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2559.

Insulin-like growth factor-I-dependent up-regulation of ZEB1 drives
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human prostate cancer cells.

Graham TR(1), Zhau HE, Odero-Marah VA, Osunkoya AO, Kimbro KS, Tighiouart M, Liu 
T, Simons JW, O'Regan RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2008 May 15;68(10):4012.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is crucial for the migration and
invasion of many epithelial tumors, including prostate cancer. Although it is
known that ZEB1 overexpression promotes EMT primarily through down-regulation of 
E-cadherin in a variety of cancers, the soluble ligands responsible for the
activation of ZEB1 have yet to be identified. In the present study, we
investigated the role of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) in the regulation
of ZEB1 during EMT associated with prostate tumor cell migration. We found that
ZEB1 is expressed in highly aggressive prostate cancer cells and that its
expression correlates directly with Gleason grade in human prostate tumors (P <
0.001). IGF-I up-regulates ZEB1 expression in prostate cancer cells exhibiting an
epithelial phenotype. In prostate cancer cells displaying a mesenchymal
phenotype, ZEB1 inhibition reverses the suppression of E-cadherin protein and
down-regulates the expression of the mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and
fibronectin. Furthermore, ZEB1 blockade decreases migratory and invasive
potential in ARCaP(M) compared with the control. These results identify ZEB1 as a
key transcriptional regulator of EMT in prostate cancer and suggest that the
aberrant expression of ZEB1 in prostate cancer cells occurs in part in response
to IGF-I stimulation.

PMID: 18381457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 May;10(5):593-601. doi: 10.1038/ncb1722. Epub 2008 Mar 30.

The miR-200 family and miR-205 regulate epithelial to mesenchymal transition by
targeting ZEB1 and SIP1.

Gregory PA(1), Bert AG, Paterson EL, Barry SC, Tsykin A, Farshid G, Vadas MA,
Khew-Goodall Y, Goodall GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Institute and Division of Human Immunology, Institute of Medical and
Veterinary Science, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 May;136(5):1835-7.
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 May;10(5):501-2.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) facilitates tissue remodelling during 
embryonic development and is viewed as an essential early step in tumour
metastasis. We found that all five members of the microRNA-200 family (miR-200a, 
miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-141 and miR-429) and miR-205 were markedly downregulated 
in cells that had undergone EMT in response to transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta or to ectopic expression of the protein tyrosine phosphatase Pez.
Enforced expression of the miR-200 family alone was sufficient to prevent
TGF-beta-induced EMT. Together, these microRNAs cooperatively regulate expression
of the E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 (also known as deltaEF1) and
SIP1 (also known as ZEB2), factors previously implicated in EMT and tumour
metastasis. Inhibition of the microRNAs was sufficient to induce EMT in a process
requiring upregulation of ZEB1 and/or SIP1. Conversely, ectopic expression of
these microRNAs in mesenchymal cells initiated mesenchymal to epithelial
transition (MET). Consistent with their role in regulating EMT, expression of
these microRNAs was found to be lost in invasive breast cancer cell lines with
mesenchymal phenotype. Expression of the miR-200 family was also lost in regions 
of metaplastic breast cancer specimens lacking E-cadherin. These data suggest
that downregulation of the microRNAs may be an important step in tumour
progression.

PMID: 18376396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Am J Pathol. 2008 Apr;172(4):893-904. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070899. Epub 2008 
Mar 5.

Inhibition of CCN6 (Wnt-1-induced signaling protein 3) down-regulates E-cadherin 
in the breast epithelium through induction of snail and ZEB1.

Huang W(1), Zhang Y, Varambally S, Chinnaiyan AM, Banerjee M, Merajver SD, Kleer 
CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1150 W.
Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0605, USA.

The cysteine-rich protein CCN6 [or Wnt-1-induced signaling protein 3 (WISP3)]
exerts tumor-suppressive effects in aggressive inflammatory breast cancer. Loss
of CCN6 is associated with poorly differentiated phenotypes and increased
invasion. Here, we show that reduction of CCN6 expression occurs in 60% of
invasive breast carcinomas and is associated with axillary lymph node metastases.
Furthermore, low CCN6 expression in invasive carcinoma tissue samples correlates 
with reduced expression of E-cadherin. In vitro, RNA interference knockdown of
CCN6 in two benign human mammary epithelial cell lines (HME and MCF10A) decreased
expression of E-cadherin protein and mRNA and reduced activity of the E-cadherin 
promoter; this reduction was dependent on intact E-box elements. CCN6 knockdown
in HME cells resulted in up-regulation of the E-cadherin transcriptional
repressors Snail and ZEB1 and enhanced their recruitment and binding to the
E-cadherin promoter as analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of ZEB1 or Snail blocked the down-regulation
of E-cadherin caused by CCN6 inhibition. These data show, for the first time,
that CCN6 expression is reduced or lost in a substantial number of invasive
breast carcinomas and that CCN6 modulates transcriptional repressors of
E-cadherin. Together, our results lead to a new hypothesis that Snail and ZEB1
are downstream of CCN6 and play a critical role in CCN6-mediated regulation of
E-cadherin in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2276413
PMID: 18321996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Thorac Oncol. 2008 Feb;3(2):117-24. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181622bef.

Tumor response to combination celecoxib and erlotinib therapy in non-small cell
lung cancer is associated with a low baseline matrix metalloproteinase-9 and a
decline in serum-soluble E-cadherin.

Reckamp KL(1), Gardner BK, Figlin RA, Elashoff D, Krysan K, Dohadwala M, Mao J,
Sharma S, Inge L, Rajasekaran A, Dubinett SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Therapeutics Research, City of Hope and
Beckman Research Institute, Duarte, California, USA. kreckamp@coh.org

INTRODUCTION: Cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression may mediate resistance to epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition through prostaglandin
E2-dependent promotion of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Suppression
of epithelial markers, such as E-cadherin, can lead to resistance to erlotinib.
Prostaglandin E2 down-regulates E-cadherin expression by up-regulating
transcriptional repressors, including ZEB1 and Snail. Furthermore, E-cadherin can
be modulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of MMPs
(TIMPs), promoting tumor invasion and metastasis. Markers of EMT and tumor
invasion were evaluated in patient serum from a phase I clinical trial
investigating the combination of celecoxib and erlotinib in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients.
METHODS: Samples from 22 subjects were evaluated. Soluble E-cadherin (sEC) was
evaluated by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay in patient serum at baseline, week
4, and week 8 of treatment. Other markers of EMT and angiogenesis were evaluated 
by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay, including MMP-9, TIMP-1, and CCL15.
RESULTS: Serum sEC, MMP-9, TIMP-1, and CCL15 levels were determined at baseline
and week 8. Patients with a partial response to therapy had a significant
decrease in sEC, TIMP-1, and CCL15 at week 8. In patients who responded to the
combination therapy, baseline MMP-9 was significantly lower compared with
nonresponders (p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: sEC, MMP-9, TIMP-1, and CCL15 levels correlate with response to
combination therapy with erlotinib and celecoxib in patients with NSCLC. A
randomized phase II trial is planned comparing erlotinib and celecoxib with
erlotinib plus placebo in advanced NSCLC. This study will prospectively assess
these and other biomarkers in serum and tumor tissue.

PMID: 18303430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 15;68(2):537-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5682.

The transcriptional repressor ZEB1 promotes metastasis and loss of cell polarity 
in cancer.

Spaderna S(1), Schmalhofer O, Wahlbuhl M, Dimmler A, Bauer K, Sultan A, Hlubek F,
Jung A, Strand D, Eger A, Kirchner T, Behrens J, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Invasion and metastasis are the hallmarks of malignant tumor progression and the 
main cause of death in cancer. The embryonic program "epithelial-mesenchymal
transition" (EMT) is thought to trigger invasion by allowing tumor cell
dissemination. Here, we describe that the EMT-inducing transcriptional repressor 
ZEB1 promotes colorectal cancer cell metastasis and loss of cell polarity.
Thereby, ZEB1 suppresses the expression of cell polarity factors, in particular
of Lgl2, which we found reduced in colorectal and breast cancers. We further show
that retention of Lgl2 expression is critical for the epithelial phenotype and
that its loss might be involved in metastasis. Thus, by linking EMT, loss of
polarity, and metastasis, ZEB1 is a crucial promoter of malignant tumor
progression.

PMID: 18199550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Development. 2008 Feb;135(3):579-88. doi: 10.1242/dev.007047.

Zeb1 links epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cellular senescence.

Liu Y(1), El-Naggar S, Darling DS, Higashi Y, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual
Sciences, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY 40202, 
USA.

Overexpression of zinc finger E-box binding homeobox transcription factor 1
(Zeb1) in cancer leads to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
increased metastasis. As opposed to overexpression, we show that mutation of Zeb1
in mice causes a mesenchymal-epithelial transition in gene expression
characterized by ectopic expression of epithelial genes such as E-cadherin and
loss of expression of mesenchymal genes such as vimentin. In contrast to rapid
proliferation in cancer cells where Zeb1 is overexpressed, this
mesenchymal-epithelial transition in mutant mice is associated with diminished
proliferation of progenitor cells at sites of developmental defects, including
the forming palate, skeleton and CNS. Zeb1 dosage-dependent deregulation of
epithelial and mesenchymal genes extends to mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs),
and mutant MEFs also display diminished replicative capacity in culture, leading 
to premature senescence. Replicative senescence in MEFs is classically triggered 
by products of the Ink4a (Cdkn2a) gene. However, this Ink4a pathway is not
activated during senescence of Zeb1 mutant MEFs. Instead, there is ectopic
expression of two other cell cycle inhibitory cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors,
p15Ink4b (Cdkn2b) and p21Cdkn1a (Cdkn1a). We demonstrate that this ectopic
expression of p15Ink4b extends in vivo to sites of diminished progenitor cell
proliferation and developmental defects in Zeb1-null mice.

PMCID: PMC2507753
PMID: 18192284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 Jan;49(1):184-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-0847.

Analysis of the posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 3 gene, TCF8, in
late-onset Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Mehta JS(1), Vithana EN, Tan DT, Yong VH, Yam GH, Law RW, Chong WG, Pang CP, Aung
T.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Eye Research Institute, 11 Third Hospital Avenue, Singapore.
jodmehta@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: Because the endothelial (posterior) corneal dystrophies share common
pathologic features and result from primary endothelial dysfunction, it is
possible that a proportion of them could be clinical manifestations of different 
mutations of the same gene. The aim of our study was to determine whether
mutations of the TCF8 gene, recently implicated in posterior polymorphous
dystrophy, may also play a role in the development of the more common Fuchs
endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD).
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from leukocytes of peripheral blood, and the
nine exons of the TCF8 gene were PCR amplified and subjected to bidirectional
sequencing and analysis. Samples from 74 unrelated Chinese patients (55 women, 19
men) with a diagnosis of late-onset FECD and 93 age- and race-matched controls
were studied.
RESULTS: The affected probands ranged in age from 52 to 91 years (mean age, 65.1 
years); 8 had familial FECD and 66 had sporadic FECD. The authors found two
mutations in the coding region of the TCF8 gene: a novel missense mutation in one
patient c.2087A>G in exon 7 (Asn696Ser) and a silent mutation in exon 2 c.192T>C 
(D64D).
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of a novel missense mutation in only one of the
patients implied that TCF8 does not play a significant role in the pathogenesis
of FECD in this Chinese population.

PMID: 18172091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. PLoS Pathog. 2007 Dec;3(12):e194.

ZEB1 regulates the latent-lytic switch in infection by Epstein-Barr virus.

Yu X(1), Wang Z, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

The immediate-early (IE) BZLF1 gene of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) regulates the
switch between latent and lytic infection by EBV. We previously showed that the
cellular transcription factor ZEB1 binds to a sequence element, ZV, located at nt
-17 to -12 relative to the transcription initiation site of the BZLF1 promoter,
Zp, repressing transcription from Zp in a transient transfection assay. Here, we 
report the phenotype in the context of a whole EBV genome of a variant of EBV
strain B95.8 containing a 2-bp substitution mutation in the ZV element of Zp that
reduced, but did not eliminate, ZEB1 binding to Zp. Strikingly, epithelial 293
cells latently infected with the EBV ZV mutant spontaneously produced IE-,
early-, and late-gene products and infectious virus, while wild-type
(WT)-infected 293 cells did not and have never been reported to do so.
Furthermore, treatment with the chemical inducers sodium butyrate and
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) led to an additional
order-of-magnitude production of infectious virus in the ZV mutant-infected 293
cells, but still no virus in the WT-infected 293 cells. Similarly, ZV
mutant-infected Burkitt's lymphoma BJAB cells accumulated at least 10-fold more
EBV IE mRNAs than did WT-infected BJAB cells, with TPA or sodium butyrate
treatment leading to an additional 5- to 10-fold accumulation of EBV IE mRNAs in 
the ZV mutant-infected cells. Thus, we conclude that ZEB1 binding to Zp plays a
central role in regulating the latent-lytic switch in EBV-infected epithelial and
B cells, suggesting ZEB1 as a target for lytic-induction therapies in
EBV-associated malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2134958
PMID: 18085824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2007 Oct;7(10):1405-21.

Inflammation and lung carcinogenesis: applying findings in prevention and
treatment.

Peebles KA(1), Lee JM, Mao JT, Hazra S, Reckamp KL, Krysan K, Dohadwala M,
Heinrich EL, Walser TC, Cui X, Baratelli FE, Garon E, Sharma S, Dubinett SM.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Division of Pulmonary & Critical Care
Medicine & Hospitalists, Department of Medicine, UCLA Lung Cancer Research
Program, CA, USA. katherine.peebles@gmail.com

Lung carcinogenesis is a complex process requiring the acquisition of genetic
mutations that confer the malignant phenotype as well as epigenetic alterations
that may be manipulated in the course of therapy. Inflammatory signals in the
lung cancer microenvironment can promote apoptosis resistance, proliferation,
invasion, metastasis, and secretion of proangiogenic and immunosuppressive
factors. Here, we discuss several prototypical inflammatory mediators controlling
the malignant phenotype in lung cancer. Investigation into the detailed molecular
mechanisms underlying the tumor-promoting effects of inflammation in lung cancer 
has revealed novel potential drug targets. Cytokines, growth factors and
small-molecule inflammatory mediators released in the developing tumor
microenvironment pave the way for epithelial-mesenchymal transition, the shift
from a polarized, epithelial phenotype to a highly motile mesenchymal phenotype
that becomes dysregulated during tumor invasion. Inflammatory mediators within
the tumor microenvironment are derived from neoplastic cells as well as stromal
and inflammatory cells; thus, lung cancer develops in a host environment in which
the deregulated inflammatory response promotes tumor progression.
Inflammation-related metabolic and catabolic enzymes (prostaglandin E(2)
synthase, prostaglandin I(2) synthase and 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase),
cell-surface receptors (E-type prostaglandin receptors) and transcription factors
(ZEB1, SNAIL, PPARs, STATs and NF-kappaB) are differentially expressed in lung
cancer cells compared with normal lung epithelial cells and, thus, may contribute
to tumor initiation and progression. These newly discovered molecular mechanisms 
in the pathogenesis of lung cancer provide novel opportunities for targeted
therapy and prevention in lung cancer.

PMID: 17944566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Nov-Dec;1769(11-12):649-58. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Basic helix-loop-helix factors recruit nuclear factor I to enhance expression of 
the NaV 1.4 Na+ channel gene.

Hebert SL(1), Simmons C, Thompson AL, Zorc CS, Blalock EM, Kraner SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, University of Kentucky
Medical Center, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. slhebe2@email.uky.edu

We have previously shown that the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factors coordinate Na(V) 1.4 Na(+) channel gene expression in skeletal muscle,
but the identity of the co-factors they direct is unknown. Using C2C12 muscle
cells as a model system, we test the hypothesis that the bHLH factors counteract 
negative regulation exerted through a repressor E box (-90/-85) by recruiting
positive-acting transcription factors to the nucleotides (-135/-57) surrounding
the repressor E box. We used electrophoretic mobility shift assays to identify
candidate factors that bound the repressor E box or these adjacent regions.
Repressor E box-binding factors included the known transcription factor,
ZEB/AREB6, and a novel repressor E box-binding factor designated REB. Mutations
of the repressor E box that interfere with the binding of these factors prevented
repression. The transcription factor, nuclear factor I (NFI), bound immediately
upstream and downstream of the repressor E box. Mutation of the NFI-binding sites
diminished the ability of myogenin and MRF4 to counteract repression. Based on
these observations we suggest that bHLH factors recruit NFI to enhance skeletal
muscle Na(+) channel expression.

PMCID: PMC2176085
PMID: 17936922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Nov 1;143A(21):2549-56.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy is associated with TCF8 gene mutations
and abdominal hernia.

Aldave AJ(1), Yellore VS, Yu F, Bourla N, Sonmez B, Salem AK, Rayner SA, Sampat
KM, Krafchak CM, Richards JE.

Author information: 
(1)The Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. aldave@jsei.ucla.edu

Mutations in the two-handed zinc-finger homeodomain transcription factor gene
(TCF8) have been associated with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) 
and extraocular developmental abnormalities. We performed screening of TCF8 in 32
affected, unrelated probands, affected and unaffected family members of probands 
identified with a TCF8 mutation, and in 100 control individuals. Eight different 
pathogenic mutations were identified in eight probands: four frameshift
(c.953_954insA, c.1506dupA, c.1592delA, and c.3012_3013delAG); three nonsense
(Gln12X, Gln214X, Arg325X); and one missense (Met1Arg). Screening of TCF8 in
affected and unaffected family members in six families demonstrated that each
identified mutation segregated with the disease phenotype in each family; two
probands did not have additional family members available for analysis. None of
the eight TCF8 mutations was identified in 200 control chromosomes. The
prevalence of hernias of the abdominal region in affected individuals with PPCD
associated with TCF8 mutations was significantly higher than the prevalence in
both individuals with PPCD not associated with a TCF8 mutation and in unaffected 
individuals. Therefore, PPCD is associated with TCF8 mutations in one quarter of 
affected families in this study, or about one third of all PPCD families that
have been screened thus far. In these families, the presence of apparently
causative TCF8 mutations is associated with abdominal and inguinal hernias.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17935237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 15;67(18):8486-93.

Membrane-bound heparin-binding epidermal growth factor like growth factor
regulates E-cadherin expression in pancreatic carcinoma cells.

Wang F(1), Sloss C, Zhang X, Lee SW, Cusack JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. fwang6@partners.org

Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) is a member
of the EGF growth factor family. Initially synthesized as a membrane-bound
precursor (pro-HB-EGF), it is cleaved at the juxtamembrane domain to release the 
soluble form of HB-EGF (s-HB-EGF) by sheddases, including matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP) and a disintegrin and metalloproteinases. This is a
process referred to as ectodomain shedding and is implicated in the process of
all ligands of the EGF receptor (EGFR) family. The tumorigenic potential of
s-HB-EGF has been studied extensively; however, the role of pro-HB-EGF in tumor
progression is unknown, despite the fact that a considerable amount of pro-HB-EGF
remains on the cell membrane. Our data here clearly indicated the distinct role
of pro-HB-EGF in the regulation of E-cadherin expression and the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We showed here that the expression of
pro-HB-EGF was associated with the differentiation status in pancreatic tumors
and cell lines. Expression of noncleaved pro-HB-EGF in pancreatic cells resulted 
in the up-regulation of E-cadherin through suppression of ZEB1, which is a
transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin. Inhibition of HB-EGF shedding using a
MMP inhibitor, GM6001, also dramatically augmented the E-cadherin expression
while suppressing the EGFR activation. Moreover, up-regulation of E-cadherin by
pro-HB-EGF not only resulted in cellular morphologic change but also decreased
cell motility and enhanced apoptotic sensitivity in response to
gemcitabine-erlotinib treatment. Collectively, our data defined a distinct role
of pro-HB-EGF in the regulation of E-cadherin, suggesting that inhibition of
shedding may be a novel approach to suppress pancreatic metastasis and sensitize 
cells to cancer therapy.

PMID: 17875687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;67(17):7972-6.

Overexpression of the microRNA hsa-miR-200c leads to reduced expression of
transcription factor 8 and increased expression of E-cadherin.

Hurteau GJ(1), Carlson JA, Spivack SD, Brock GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ordway Research Institute, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

MicroRNAs are approximately 22-nucleotide sequences thought to interact with
multiple mRNAs resulting in either translational repression or degradation. We
previously reported that several microRNAs had variable expression in mammalian
cell lines, and we examined one, miR-200c, in more detail. A combination of
bioinformatics and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR was used to identify
potential targets and revealed that the zinc finger transcription factor
transcription factor 8 (TCF8; also termed ZEB1, deltaEF1, Nil-2-alpha) had
inversely proportional expression levels to miR-200c. Knockout experiments using 
anti-microRNA oligonucleotides increased TCF8 levels but with nonspecific
effects. Therefore, to investigate target predictions, we overexpressed miR-200c 
in select cells lines. Ordinarily, the expression level of miR-200c in
non-small-cell lung cancer A549 cells is low in contrast to normal human
bronchial epithelial cells. Stable overexpression of miR-200c in A549 cells
results in a loss of TCF8, an increase in expression of its regulatory target,
E-cadherin, and altered cell morphology. In MCF7 (estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer) cells, there is endogenous expression of miR-200c and E-cadherin
but TCF8 is absent. Conversely, MDA-MB-231 (estrogen receptor-negative) cells
lack detectable miR-200c and E-cadherin (the latter reportedly due to promoter
region methylation) but express TCF8. The ectopic expression of miR-200c in this 
cell line also reduced levels of TCF8, restored E-cadherin expression, and
altered cell morphology. Because the down-regulation of E-cadherin is a crucial
event in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, loss of miR-200c expression could 
play a significant role in the initiation of an invasive phenotype, and, equally,
miR-200c overexpression holds potential for its reversal.

PMID: 17804704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):10113-22. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

ZEB1 and c-Jun levels contribute to the establishment of highly lytic
Epstein-Barr virus infection in gastric AGS cells.

Feng WH(1), Kraus RJ, Dickerson SJ, Lim HJ, Jones RJ, Yu X, Mertz JE, Kenney SC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC
27599, USA.

The induction of lytic infection has been proposed as a therapeutic strategy for 
treating Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive malignancies. To succeed, efficient
methods are needed for activating the EBV immediate-early (IE) promoters, Zp and 
Rp. Here we compared factors which regulate Zp and Rp in AGS gastric carcinoma
cells that support a remarkably high level of persistently lytic EBV infection
with HeLa cervical cells that permit only tightly latent infection. We found that
the level of Zp activity assayed by transient transfection assays with reporter
plasmids was high in AGS cells but low in HeLa cells. The level of Rp activity
was low in both cell types. Mutational analysis indicated that sequences within
Zp located between -70 and +27 relative to the transcription initiation site were
sufficient to confer a high level of Zp activity in AGS cells. The Zp CRE motif
was necessary for this constitutive activity, while the ZIA and ZIB MEF2D motifs 
were not. Consistent with these findings, immunoblot analysis indicated that
phosphorylated c-Jun, which activates Zp through the CRE motif, was expressed at 
a much higher level in EBV-infected AGS cells than in EBV-infected HeLa cells. In
contrast, ZEB1, which represses Zp via the ZV motif located near the
transcription initiation site, was abundant in HeLa cells, while it was absent
from AGS cells. Exogenous addition of ZEB1 led to the repression of Zp in AGS
cells. We conclude that the unusually high Zp activity level in AGS cells is due 
to the high abundance of positively acting transcription factors such as c-Jun
combined with the low abundance of negatively acting factors such as ZEB1.

PMCID: PMC2045427
PMID: 17626078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Sep;18(9):3533-44. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

Differential regulation of epithelial and mesenchymal markers by deltaEF1
proteins in epithelial mesenchymal transition induced by TGF-beta.

Shirakihara T(1), Saitoh M, Miyazono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a crucial event in cancer progression
and embryonic development, is induced by transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta in
mouse mammary NMuMG epithelial cells. Id proteins have previously been reported
to inhibit major features of TGF-beta-induced EMT. In this study, we show that
expression of the deltaEF1 family proteins, deltaEF1 (ZEB1) and SIP1, is
gradually increased by TGF-beta with expression profiles reciprocal to that of
E-cadherin. SIP1 and deltaEF1 each dramatically down-regulated the transcription 
of E-cadherin in NMuMG cells through direct binding to the E-cadherin promoter.
Silencing of the expression of both SIP1 and deltaEF1, but not either alone,
completely abolished TGF-beta-induced E-cadherin repression. However, expression 
of mesenchymal markers, including fibronectin, N-cadherin, and vimentin, was not 
affected by knockdown of SIP1 and deltaEF1. TGF-beta-induced the expression of
Ets1, which in turn activated deltaEF1 promoter activity. Moreover, up-regulation
of SIP1 and deltaEF1 expression by TGF-beta was suppressed by knockdown of Ets1
expression. In addition, Id2 suppressed the TGF-beta- and Ets1-induced
up-regulation of deltaEF1. Taken together, these findings suggest that the
deltaEF1 family proteins, SIP1 and deltaEF1, are necessary, but not sufficient,
for TGF-beta-induced EMT and that Ets1 induced by TGF-beta may function as an
upstream transcriptional regulator of SIP1 and deltaEF1.

PMCID: PMC1951739
PMID: 17615296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 31;360(3):621-6. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

The ZFHX1A gene is differentially autoregulated by its isoforms.

Manavella PA(1), Roqueiro G, Darling DS, Cabanillas AM.

Author information: 
(1)CIBICI-CONICET, Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias
Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Haya de la Torre y Medina Allende,
5000 Córdoba, Argentina.

The Zfhx1a gene expresses two different isoforms; the full length Zfhx1a-1 and a 
truncated isoform termed Zfhx1a-2 lacking the first exon. Deletion analysis of
the Zfhx1a-1 promoter localized cell-specific repressors, and a proximal G-string
that is critically required for transactivation. Transfection of Zfhx1a-1 cDNA,
but not Zfhx1a-2, downregulates Zfhx1a-1 promoter activity. Mutation of an E2-box
disrupted the binding of both Zfhx1a isoforms. Consistent with this, transfected 
Zfhx1a-1 does not regulate the transcriptional activity of the E-box mutated
Zfhx1a-1 promoter. Competitive EMSAs and transfection assays show that Zfhx1a-2
can function as a dominant negative isoform since it is able to compete and
displace Zfhx1a-1 from its binding site and overcome Zfhx1a-1 induced repression 
of the Zfhx1a-1 promoter in cells. Hence, the Zfhx1a-1 gene is autoregulated in
part by negative feedback on its own promoter which is, in turn, modified by the 
availability of the negative dominant isoform Zfhx1a-2.

PMCID: PMC2770808
PMID: 17610840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 15;67(12):5587-93.

Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling elevates
15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Yang L(1), Amann JM, Kikuchi T, Porta R, Guix M, Gonzalez A, Park KH, Billheimer 
D, Arteaga CL, Tai HH, DuBois R, Carbone DP, Johnson DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Evidence indicates that the induction of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and high
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels contribute to the pathogenesis of non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). In addition to overproduction by COX-2, PGE2 concentrations 
also depend upon the levels of the PGE2 catabolic enzyme 15-hydroxyprostaglandin 
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH). We find a dramatic down-regulation of PGDH protein in
NSCLC cell lines and in resected human tumors when compared with matched normal
lung. Affymetrix array analysis of 10 normal lung tissue samples and 49 resected 
lung tumors revealed a much lower expression of PGDH transcripts in all NSCLC
histologic groups. In addition, treatment with the epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR TKI) erlotinib increased the expression 
of 15-PGDH in a subset of NSCLC cell lines. This effect may be due in part to an 
inhibition of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway as
treatment with mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor U0126
mimics the erlotinib results. We show by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
that the transcript levels of ZEB1 and Slug transcriptional repressors are
dramatically reduced in a responsive cell line upon EGFR and MEK/ERK inhibition. 
In addition, the Slug protein, but not ZEB1, binds to the PGDH promoter and
represses transcription. As these repressors function by recruiting histone
deacetylases to promoters, it is likely that PGDH is repressed by an epigenetic
mechanism involving histone deacetylation, resulting in increased PGE2 activity
in tumors. This effect is reversible in a subset of NSCLC upon treatment with an 
EGFR TKI.

PMID: 17575121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007 Jun;7(6):415-28. Epub 2007 May 17.

Snail, Zeb and bHLH factors in tumour progression: an alliance against the
epithelial phenotype?

Peinado H(1), Olmeda D, Cano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols CSIC-UAM,
Arturo Duperier 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The molecular mechanisms that underlie tumour progression are still poorly
understood, but recently our knowledge of particular aspects of some of these
processes has increased. Specifically, the identification of Snail, ZEB and some 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors as inducers of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and potent repressors of E-cadherin expression has opened new
avenues of research with potential clinical implications.

PMID: 17508028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 25;26(49):6979-88. Epub 2007 May 7.

The transcription factor ZEB1 (deltaEF1) promotes tumour cell dedifferentiation
by repressing master regulators of epithelial polarity.

Aigner K(1), Dampier B, Descovich L, Mikula M, Sultan A, Schreiber M, Mikulits W,
Brabletz T, Strand D, Obrist P, Sommergruber W, Schweifer N, Wernitznig A, Beug
H, Foisner R, Eger A.

Author information: 
(1)Max F Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical
University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is implicated in the progression of
primary tumours towards metastasis and is likely caused by a pathological
activation of transcription factors regulating EMT in embryonic development. To
analyse EMT-causing pathways in tumourigenesis, we identified transcriptional
targets of the E-cadherin repressor ZEB1 in invasive human cancer cells. We show 
that ZEB1 repressed multiple key determinants of epithelial differentiation and
cell-cell adhesion, including the cell polarity genes Crumbs3, HUGL2 and
Pals1-associated tight junction protein. ZEB1 associated with their endogenous
promoters in vivo, and strongly repressed promotor activities in reporter assays.
ZEB1 downregulation in undifferentiated cancer cells by RNA interference was
sufficient to upregulate expression of these cell polarity genes on the RNA and
protein level, to re-establish epithelial features and to impair cell motility in
vitro. In human colorectal cancer, ZEB1 expression was limited to the tumour-host
interface and was accompanied by loss of intercellular adhesion and tumour cell
invasion. In invasive ductal and lobular breast cancer, upregulation of ZEB1 was 
stringently coupled to cancer cell dedifferentiation. Our data show that ZEB1
represents a key player in pathologic EMTs associated with tumour progression.

PMCID: PMC2899859
PMID: 17486063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biomed Sci. 2007 Sep;14(5):663-79. Epub 2007 May 4.

deltaEF1 represses BMP-2-induced differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts into the
osteoblast lineage.

Yang S(1), Zhao L, Yang J, Chai D, Zhang M, Zhang J, Ji X, Zhu T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Nankai University, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin, 300071, China.

Osteoblasts, derived from pluripotent mesenchymal precursor cells, acquire their 
differentiated phenotypes under the control of a series of regulatory factors,
the best known of which is BMP-2. Our recent preliminary studies suggest that
expression of deltaEF1, a member of the zinc finger-homeodomain transcription
factor family, is significantly down-regulated as human mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) are subjected to osteoblastic differentiation in the presence of BMP-2.
Here we demonstrate that overexpression of deltaEF1 in murine pre-myoblast C2C12 
cells resulted in a decrease in the mRNA levels of early osteoblast marker genes 
induced by BMP-2 including osterix and collagen type I. This inhibitory effect
was further confirmed by decreased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activities. Neither
of the zinc finger clusters of deltaEF1 is necessary for its repressive effect on
BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation of C2C12 cells. Immunoprecipitation
results indicated that deltaEF1 did not physically associate with Smads proteins,
suggesting that the inhibitory effect of deltaEF1 may be Smad-independent.
deltaEF1 overexpression in C2C12 cells resulted in down-regulation of activating 
protein-1 (AP-1) activities promoted by BMP-2. Moreover, deltaEF1 exhibited
transrepression on murine osteocalcin gene which effect is partially mediated
through diminishing of AP-1 signaling. These results suggest that deltaEF1 acts
as a potent inhibitor of BMP-2-induced osteogenesis in vitro, in part, by
differentially regulating the AP-1 signaling pathway.

PMID: 17479358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Genet Med. 2007 Apr;9(4):228-34.

Replication and refinement of linkage of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy
to the posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 1 locus on chromosome 20.

Yellore VS(1), Papp JC, Sobel E, Khan MA, Rayner SA, Farber DB, Aldave AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cornea Service, The Jules Stein Eye Institute, Department of Human Genetics,
and Retinal Biochemistry Laboratory, David Geffen School of Medicine at
University of California Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

PURPOSE: The study purpose was to identify the genetic basis of posterior
polymorphous corneal dystrophy, an autosomal dominant disorder of the corneal
endothelium that is associated with the development of corneal edema,
necessitating corneal transplantation for visual rehabilitation. Glaucoma also
develops in up to 40% of patients with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy.
METHODS: Linkage analysis, using microsatellite markers previously used to
demonstrate linkage of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy to the chromosome
20 candidate region known as posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 1, was
performed in 29 members of a family with posterior polymorphous corneal
dystrophy. Thirty-four microsatellite markers were used to refine the posterior
polymorphous corneal dystrophy 1 interval. TCF8, located on chromosome 10, was
screened in an affected family member to exclude posterior polymorphous corneal
dystrophy 3.
RESULTS: Significant evidence of linkage to the posterior polymorphous corneal
dystrophy 1 interval was obtained with both single-point and multipoint analyses.
The largest single-point log odds ratio score obtained was 4.38 (theta=0) at
marker D20S471; within 4.7 Mbp (7.2 cM) of D20S471 eight markers provided
single-point log odds ratio scores of greater than 3.00 and three markers
provided single-point log odds ratio scores greater than 4.00. The largest
multipoint log odds ratio score obtained was 4.83, found across the adjacent
markers D20S844, D20S191, D20S484, and D20S111. The support interval for
posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 1 in the family we report is
approximately 13.5 Mbp (10 cM) long and lies between the markers D20S182 and
D20S195. Eleven markers have multipoint log odds ratio scores greater than 4.0
within this region. No coding region mutations were identified in TCF8 in an
affected member of the family, effectively excluding posterior polymorphous
corneal dystrophy 3.
CONCLUSIONS: The originally described 19.8 cM posterior polymorphous corneal
dystrophy 1 candidate disease interval has been refined to a 10 cM interval
between markers D20S182 and D20S195. A portion of this refined interval overlaps 
a more recently reported posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 1 interval,
with only 20 known and predicted genes mapped to the 2.4 cM common interval.

PMID: 17438387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jun;28(6):638.

Novel mutations in the ZEB1 gene identified in Czech and British patients with
posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy.

Liskova P(1), Tuft SJ, Gwilliam R, Ebenezer ND, Jirsova K, Prescott Q, Martincova
R, Pretorius M, Sinclair N, Boase DL, Jeffrey MJ, Deloukas P, Hardcastle AJ,
Filipec M, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, UCL, London,
United Kingdom. p.liskova@ucl.ac.uk

We describe the search for mutations in six unrelated Czech and four unrelated
British families with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD); a
relatively rare eye disorder. Coding exons and intron/exon boundaries of all
three genes (VSX1, COL8A2, and ZEB1/TCF8) previously reported to be implicated in
the pathogenesis of this disorder were screened by DNA sequencing. Four novel
pathogenic mutations were identified in four families; two deletions, one
nonsense, and one duplication within exon 7 in the ZEB1 gene located at 10p11.2. 
We also genotyped the Czech patients to test for a founder haplotype and lack of 
disease segregation with the 20p11.2 locus we previously described. Although a
systematic clinical examination was not performed, our investigation does not
support an association between ZEB1 changes and self reported non-ocular
anomalies. In the remaining six families no disease causing mutations were
identified thereby indicating that as yet unidentified gene(s) are likely to be
responsible for PPCD.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2696796
PMID: 17437275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nature. 2007 Apr 19;446(7138):882-7. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Opposing LSD1 complexes function in developmental gene activation and repression 
programmes.

Wang J(1), Scully K, Zhu X, Cai L, Zhang J, Prefontaine GG, Krones A, Ohgi KA,
Zhu P, Garcia-Bassets I, Liu F, Taylor H, Lozach J, Jayes FL, Korach KS, Glass
CK, Fu XD, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department and School of Medicine, University
of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, Room 345, La Jolla, California
92093-0648, USA.

Precise control of transcriptional programmes underlying metazoan development is 
modulated by enzymatically active co-regulatory complexes, coupled with
epigenetic strategies. One thing that remains unclear is how specific members of 
histone modification enzyme families, such as histone methyltransferases and
demethylases, are used in vivo to simultaneously orchestrate distinct
developmental gene activation and repression programmes. Here, we report that the
histone lysine demethylase, LSD1--a component of the CoREST-CtBP co-repressor
complex--is required for late cell-lineage determination and differentiation
during pituitary organogenesis. LSD1 seems to act primarily on target gene
activation programmes, as well as in gene repression programmes, on the basis of 
recruitment of distinct LSD1-containing co-activator or co-repressor complexes.
LSD1-dependent gene repression programmes can be extended late in development
with the induced expression of ZEB1, a Krüppel-like repressor that can act as a
molecular beacon for recruitment of the LSD1-containing CoREST-CtBP co-repressor 
complex, causing repression of an additional cohort of genes, such as Gh, which
previously required LSD1 for activation. These findings suggest that temporal
patterns of expression of specific components of LSD1 complexes modulate gene
regulatory programmes in many mammalian organs.

PMID: 17392792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. FEBS Lett. 2007 Apr 17;581(8):1617-24. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

The transcription factor ZEB1 (deltaEF1) represses Plakophilin 3 during human
cancer progression.

Aigner K(1), Descovich L, Mikula M, Sultan A, Dampier B, Bonné S, van Roy F,
Mikulits W, Schreiber M, Brabletz T, Sommergruber W, Schweifer N, Wernitznig A,
Beug H, Foisner R, Eger A.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical
University Vienna, Dr. Bohrgasse 9, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Plakophilin 3 (PKP3) belongs to the p120ctn family of armadillo-related proteins 
predominantly functioning in desmosome formation. Here we report that PKP3 is
transcriptionally repressed by the E-cadherin repressor ZEB1 in metastatic cancer
cells. ZEB1 physically associates with two conserved E-box elements in the PKP3
promoter and partially represses the activity of corresponding human and mouse
PKP3 promoter fragments in reporter gene assays. In human tumours ZEB1 is
upregulated in invasive cancer cells at the tumour-host interface, which is
accompanied by downregulation of PKP3 expression levels. Hence, the
transcriptional repression of PKP3 by ZEB1 contributes to ZEB1-mediated
disintegration of intercellular adhesion and epithelial to mesenchymal
transition.

PMCID: PMC2938730
PMID: 17391671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Feb;6(2):532-41.

Loss of homotypic cell adhesion by epithelial-mesenchymal transition or mutation 
limits sensitivity to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition.

Buck E(1), Eyzaguirre A, Barr S, Thompson S, Sennello R, Young D, Iwata KK,
Gibson NW, Cagnoni P, Haley JD.

Author information: 
(1)OSI Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 1 Bioscience Park Drive, Farmingdale, NY 11735,
USA.

Overexpression and enhanced activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) is frequently observed in human carcinomas. Inhibitors of EGFR signaling
have shown clinical utility; however, understanding response at the molecular
level is important to define patient subsets most likely to benefit, as well as
to support the rational design of drug combinations. Pancreatic and colorectal
tumor cell lines insensitive to EGFR inhibition were those that had lost or
mutated the epithelial junction constituents E-cadherin and gamma-catenin, had
lost homotypic adhesion, and often gained proteins associated with an epithelial 
to mesenchymal-like transition, such as vimentin, zeb1, or snail. In matched
pairs of colorectal tumor cells, the epithelial lines showed an average 7-fold
greater sensitivity than mesenchymal-like lines. In human pancreatic and
colorectal tumor tissues, gain of mesenchymal characteristics and loss of
epithelial characteristics correlated with advancing tumor stage. These data
indicate an especially sensitive patient subset as well as a rationale for the
combination of EGFR antagonists with agents that affect the epithelial to
mesenchymal-like transition process as a mechanism to enhance sensitivity for
more advanced mesenchymal-like tumors.

PMID: 17308052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncogene. 2007 Apr 26;26(19):2781-90. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Thymosin beta4 triggers an epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colorectal
carcinoma by upregulating integrin-linked kinase.

Huang HC(1), Hu CH, Tang MC, Wang WS, Chen PM, Su Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Life Science, National
Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, and Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is crucial for the invasion and
metastasis of many epithelial tumors including colorectal carcinoma (CRC). In the
present study, a scattering and fibroblastic morphology with reduced
intercellular contacts was found in the SW480 colon cancer cells overexpressing
the gene encoding thymosin beta4 (Tbeta4), which was accompanied by a loss of
E-cadherin as well as a cytosolic accumulation of beta-catenin, two most
prominent markers of EMT. Whereas E-cadherin downregulation was likely to be
accounted by a ZEB1-mediated transcriptional repression, the accumulation of
beta-catenin was a result of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta inactivation mediated
by integrin-linked kinase (ILK) and/or its downstream effector, Akt.
Intriguingly, ILK upregulation in Tbeta4-overexpressing SW480 cells seemed to be 
attributed mainly to a stabilization of this kinase by complexing with
particularly interesting new Cys-His protein (PINCH) more efficiently. In the
meantime, a strong correlation between the expression levels of Tbeta4, ILK and
E-cadherin in CRC patients was also revealed by immunohistochemical analysis.
Taken together, these data suggest a novel role of Tbeta4 in promoting CRC
progression by inducing an EMT in tumor cells via upregulating ILK and
consequentially its signal transduction.

PMID: 17072345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Pathol. 2006 Dec;210(4):385-9.

Regulating p73 isoforms in human tumours.

Coates PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Neurosciences, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and
Medical School, Dundee, UK. p.j.coates@dundee.ac.uk

Although mutations in the TP73 gene are extremely rare in human tumours, altered 
expression is common. In some tumours, most notably leukaemias and lymphomas,
expression of TP73 is reduced, suggesting a tumour suppressor role. In contrast, 
TP73 is over-expressed in many other tumour types, implying that it has oncogenic
functions in human tumourigenesis. These conflicting scenarios can be reconciled 
by the observations that the TP73 gene produces p53-like isoforms (TAp73) and
anti-p53 isoforms (DeltaTAp73). Thus, loss of TAp73 or over-expression of
DeltaTAp73 should each promote oncogenic transformation, and the balance of
expression of the opposing isoforms is the crucial factor. The mechanisms that
regulate expression of TP73 isoforms are therefore of great interest. Recent data
provide evidence for interacting roles of ZEB1, p300, and a polymorphic 73 bp
deletion in intron 1 of the human TP73 gene in this process. Importantly,
alterations to the proposed regulatory pathway for controlling TP73 isoform
expression in colorectal cancer are associated with adverse clinico-pathological 
characteristics. Because p73 is also associated with tumour chemosensitivity,
these new findings should provide prognostic information and have the potential
to guide future therapeutic decisions.

PMID: 17044134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Pathol. 2006 Dec;210(4):390-7.

The presence of an intronic deletion in p73 and high levels of ZEB1 alter the
TAp73/DeltaTAp73 ratio in colorectal carcinomas.

Domínguez G(1), Peña C, Silva J, García JM, García V, Rodríguez R, Cantos B,
Citores MJ, España P, Bonilla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro,
Madrid, Spain. domingg@hotmail.com

TAp73 variants largely mimic p53 suppressor activities, while DeltaTAp73 forms
act as oncogenes through the inactivation of p53 and TAp73. The present study
analysed how TAp73 and DeltaTAp73 levels might be affected by the presence of a
73 bp deletion in a regulatory region of p73. The clinical relevance of this
deletion was also examined. ZEB1 can bind to the region repressing p73
transcription in vitro. The relationship between ZEB1 and p73 variant expression 
levels was studied in the context of this deletion and the levels of the ZEB1
cofactors p300 and CtBP. Tumour and normal tissue from 81 colorectal cancer
patients was analysed to evaluate firstly the levels of TAp73, DeltaTAp73
(DeltaEx2p73, DeltaEx2/3p73, and DeltaNp73), ZEB1, p300, and CtBP by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR, and secondly the presence of the 73 bp deletion. Tumour
characteristics were examined in each patient. Suppressor and oncogenic isoforms 
of p73 were co-up-regulated in tumour tissues. Overexpression of p73 variants was
associated with adverse tumour features. The 73 bp deletion was present in 40% of
the patients and was associated with adverse pathological parameters of the
tumours and also with TAp73 down-regulation. In those cases harbouring the
deletion, the levels of ZEB1 and those of DeltaEx2p73, DeltaEx2/3p73, and
DeltaNp73 correlated directly. Variations in the concentration of p300 affected
the observed correlations between ZEB1 and the different p73 variants. In
conclusion, in colorectal cancer, the 73 bp deletion in the first intron of the
p73 gene and different expression levels of ZEB1 and p300 may act in concert to
affect the ratio of TAp73/DeltaTAp73 forms, favouring p73 oncogenic variants. In 
addition, up-regulation of p73 oncogenic isoforms predicts a poor prognosis based
on its relationship with advanced tumour stage.

PMID: 17029218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Gastroenterology. 2006 Sep;131(3):830-40.

A transient, EMT-linked loss of basement membranes indicates metastasis and poor 
survival in colorectal cancer.

Spaderna S(1), Schmalhofer O, Hlubek F, Berx G, Eger A, Merkel S, Jung A,
Kirchner T, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Loss of the basement membrane (BM) is considered an important 
step toward tumor malignancy. However, the BM is still expressed in most typical 
colorectal adenocarcinomas; nevertheless, these tumors can invade and develop
metastases. The aim of this study was to investigate the role, mechanisms, and
clinical relevance of BM turnover in malignant colorectal cancer (CRC)
progression.
METHODS: Expression of BM components and their transcriptional regulation and
clinical relevance were investigated in human CRCs and cell lines.
RESULTS: Our data show new aspects in BM turnover in CRCs with impact on
malignant tumor progression: (1) The BM is still expressed in the main tumor mass
of most colorectal adenocarcinomas, but selectively lost at invasive regions of
the tumor in many cases. (2) Selective loss of the BM at the invasive front has
high clinical and tumor biologic relevance for distant metastasis and survival.
(3) The BM is reexpressed in metastases, indicating that its loss is transient
and regulated by environmental factors. (4) This transient loss is not only due
to proteolytic breakdown but to a down-regulated synthesis and linked to an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells, and, thereby,
zinc-finger-enhancer protein 1 (ZEB1) is the crucial transcriptional repressor of
BM components in CRCs.
CONCLUSIONS: A transient BM loss at the invasive front is correlated with
increased distant metastasis and poor patient survival, indicating its tumor
biologic relevance and usefulness as a prognostic marker. Targeting ZEB1 might be
a promising therapeutic option to prevent metastasis.

PMID: 16952552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 1;26(5):711-24. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

NF-kappaB represses E-cadherin expression and enhances epithelial to mesenchymal 
transition of mammary epithelial cells: potential involvement of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2.

Chua HL(1), Bhat-Nakshatri P, Clare SE, Morimiya A, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN, USA.

The transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) is constitutively
active in both cancer cells and stromal cells of breast cancer; however, the
precise role of activated NF-kappaB in cancer progression is not known. Using
parental MCF10A cells and a variant that expresses the myoepithelial marker p63
stably overexpressing the constitutively active p65 subunit of NF-kappaB
(MCF10A/p65), we show that NF-kappaB suppresses the expression of epithelial
specific genes E-cadherin and desmoplakin and induces the expression of the
mesenchymal specific gene vimentin. P65 also suppressed the expression of p63 and
the putative breast epithelial progenitor marker cytokeratin 5/6. MCF10A/p65
cells were phenotypically similar to cells undergoing epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT). MCF10A/p65 cells failed to form characteristic acini in
three-dimensional Matrigel. Analysis of parental and MCF10A/p65 cells for genes
previously shown to be involved in EMT revealed elevated expression of ZEB-1 and 
ZEB-2 in MCF10A/p65 cells compared to parental cells. In transient transfection
assays, p65 increased ZEB-1 promoter activity. Furthermore, MCF10A cells
overexpressing ZEB-1 showed reduced E-cadherin and p63 expression and displayed
an EMT phenotype. The siRNA against ZEB-1 or ZEB-2 reduced the number of viable
MCF10A/p65 but not parental cells, suggesting the dependence of MCF10A/p65 cells 
to ZEB-1 and ZEB-2 for cell cycle progression or survival. MCF10A cells
chronically exposed to tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), a potent NF-kappaB
inducer, also exhibited the EMT-like phenotype and ZEB-1/ZEB-2 induction, both of
which were reversed following TNFalpha withdrawal.

PMID: 16862183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Cancer. 2006 Nov 1;119(9):2098-104.

The expression levels of the transcriptional regulators p300 and CtBP modulate
the correlations between SNAIL, ZEB1, E-cadherin and vitamin D receptor in human 
colon carcinomas.

Peña C(1), García JM, García V, Silva J, Domínguez G, Rodríguez R, Maximiano C,
García de Herreros A, Muñoz A, Bonilla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro,
Madrid, Spain.

ZEB1 and SNAIL repress CDH1 and induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
However, SNAIL and ZEB1 also activate or regulate other target genes in different
ways. For instance, vitamin D receptor (VDR), which activates CDH1 expression
upon ligand binding, is repressed by SNAIL but induced by ZEB1. We examined
whether the biological activity of SNAIL and ZEB1 in colon cancer is regulated by
interacting cofactors. The mRNA expression levels of SNAIL and ZEB1, and of
transcriptional regulators p300 and CtBP, were measured by RT-PCR in tumor and
normal tissue from 101 colon carcinoma patients. Overexpression of SNAIL was
associated with down-regulation of CDH1 and VDR (p = 0.004 and p < 0.001). CDH1
correlated with VDR (r = 0.49; p < 0.001). ZEB1 expression also correlated with
VDR (r = 0.23; p = 0.019). However, when CtBP was strongly expressed, ZEB1 was
inversely correlated with CDH1 (r = -0.39; p = 0.053). Furthermore, when there
were elevated p300 expression levels, the correlation between expression of ZEB1 
and VDR was stronger (r = 0.38; p = 0.070). Association between SNAIL expression 
and down-regulation of CDH1 and VDR was lost in tumors in which p300 and CtBP
were strongly expressed. These results indicate that the levels of expression of 
CtBP and p300 are critical for the action of SNAIL and ZEB1, which have a pivotal
role in EMT, and show the importance of CtBP and p300 for tumor progression.

PMID: 16804902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Res. 2006 May 15;66(10):5338-45.

Cyclooxygenase-2-dependent regulation of E-cadherin: prostaglandin E(2) induces
transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and snail in non-small cell lung cancer.

Dohadwala M(1), Yang SC, Luo J, Sharma S, Batra RK, Huang M, Lin Y, Goodglick L, 
Krysan K, Fishbein MC, Hong L, Lai C, Cameron RB, Gemmill RM, Drabkin HA,
Dubinett SM.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Research Program of the University of California at Los Angeles
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Elevated tumor cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression is associated with tumor
invasion, metastasis, and poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Here, we report that COX-2-dependent pathways contribute to the modulation of
E-cadherin expression in NSCLC. First, whereas genetically modified COX-2-sense
(COX-2-S) NSCLC cells expressed low E-cadherin and showed diminished capacity for
cellular aggregation, genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of tumor COX-2 led to
increased E-cadherin expression and resulted in augmented homotypic cellular
aggregation among NSCLC cells in vitro. An inverse relationship between COX-2 and
E-cadherin was shown in situ by double immunohistochemical staining of human lung
adenocarcinoma tissue sections. Second, treatment of NSCLC cells with exogenous
prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) significantly decreased the expression of E-cadherin,
whereas treatment of COX-2-S cells with celecoxib (1 mumol/L) led to increased
E-cadherin expression. Third, the transcriptional suppressors of E-cadherin, ZEB1
and Snail, were up-regulated in COX-2-S cells or PGE(2)-treated NSCLC cells but
decreased in COX-2-antisense cells. PGE(2) exposure led to enhanced ZEB1 and
Snail binding at the chromatin level as determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of ZEB1 or
Snail interrupted the capacity of PGE(2) to down-regulate E-cadherin. Fourth, an 
inverse relationship between E-cadherin and ZEB1 and a direct relationship
between COX-2 and ZEB1 were shown by immunohistochemical staining of human lung
adenocarcinoma tissue sections. These findings indicate that PGE(2), in autocrine
or paracrine fashion, modulates transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin and
thereby regulates COX-2-dependent E-cadherin expression in NSCLC. Thus, blocking 
PGE(2) production or activity may contribute to both prevention and treatment of 
NSCLC.

PMID: 16707460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;66(7):3893-902.

The transcription factor ZEB1 is aberrantly expressed in aggressive uterine
cancers.

Spoelstra NS(1), Manning NG, Higashi Y, Darling D, Singh M, Shroyer KR, Broaddus 
RR, Horwitz KB, Richer JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center at Fitzsimons, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The transcription factor ZEB1 (deltaEF1 in mice) has been implicated in cellular 
processes during development and tumor progression including epithelial to
mesenchymal transition. deltaEF1 null mice die at birth, but heterozygotes
expressing a LacZ reporter inserted into the deltaEF1 gene live and reproduce.
Using these mice, we observed ZEB1 promoter activity in the virgin myometrium,
and stroma and myometrium of the pregnant uterus. ZEB1 protein is up-regulated in
the myometrium and endometrial stroma after progesterone or estrogen treatment of
ovariectomized mice. In the normal human uterus, ZEB1 protein is increased in the
myometrium and stroma during the secretory stage of the menstrual cycle. ZEB1 is 
not expressed in the normal endometrial epithelium. In malignancies of the
uterus, we find that ZEB1 (a) is overexpressed in malignant tumors derived from
the myometrium (leiomyosarcomas), (b) is overexpressed in tumor-associated stroma
of low-grade endometrioid adenocarcinomas, and (c) is aberrantly expressed in the
tumor epithelial cells of aggressive endometrial cancers. Specifically, in grade 
3 endometrioid adenocarcinomas and uterine papillary serous carcinomas, ZEB1
could be expressed in the epithelial-derived carcinoma cells as well as in the
stroma. In malignant mixed Müllerian tumors, the sarcomatous component always
expresses ZEB1, and the carcinomatous component can also be positive. In summary,
ZEB1 is normally regulated by both estrogen and progesterone receptors, but in
uterine cancers, it is likely no longer under control of steroid hormone
receptors and becomes aberrantly expressed in epithelial-derived tumor cells,
supporting a role for ZEB1 in epithelial to mesenchymal transitions associated
with aggressive tumors.

PMID: 16585218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 1;66(5):2725-31.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1-dependent repression of E-cadherin in von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor-null renal cell carcinoma mediated by TCF3,
ZFHX1A, and ZFHX1B.

Krishnamachary B(1), Zagzag D, Nagasawa H, Rainey K, Okuyama H, Baek JH, Semenza 
GL.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

A critical event in the pathogenesis of invasive and metastatic cancer is
E-cadherin loss of function. Renal clear cell carcinoma (RCC) is characterized by
loss of function of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor (VHL), which
negatively regulates hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Loss of E-cadherin
expression and decreased cell-cell adhesion in VHL-null RCC4 cells were corrected
by enforced expression of VHL, a dominant-negative HIF-1alpha mutant, or a short 
hairpin RNA directed against HIF-1alpha. In human RCC biopsies, expression of
E-cadherin and HIF-1alpha was mutually exclusive. The expression of mRNAs
encoding TCF3, ZFHX1A, and ZFHX1B, which repress E-cadherin gene transcription,
was increased in VHL-null RCC4 cells in a HIF-1-dependent manner. Thus, HIF-1
contributes to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in VHL-null RCC by indirect 
repression of E-cadherin.

PMID: 16510593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;66(2):944-50.

Restoring E-cadherin expression increases sensitivity to epidermal growth factor 
receptor inhibitors in lung cancer cell lines.

Witta SE(1), Gemmill RM, Hirsch FR, Coldren CD, Hedman K, Ravdel L, Helfrich B,
Dziadziuszko R, Chan DC, Sugita M, Chan Z, Baron A, Franklin W, Drabkin HA,
Girard L, Gazdar AF, Minna JD, Bunn PA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center and University of Colorado Cancer Center, Campus Box 8117, PO Box
6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Samir.Witta@uchsc.edu

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in the majority of
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
gefitinib and erlotinib, produce 9% to 27% response rates in NSCLC patients.
E-Cadherin, a calcium-dependent adhesion molecule, plays an important role in
NSCLC prognosis and progression, and interacts with EGFR. The zinc finger
transcriptional repressor, ZEB1, inhibits E-cadherin expression by recruiting
histone deacetylases (HDAC). We identified a significant correlation between
sensitivity to gefitinib and expression of E-cadherin, and ZEB1, suggesting their
predictive value for responsiveness to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
E-Cadherin transfection into a gefitinib-resistant line increased its sensitivity
to gefitinib. Pretreating resistant cell lines with the HDAC inhibitor, MS-275,
induced E-cadherin along with EGFR and led to a growth-inhibitory and apoptotic
effect of gefitinib similar to that in gefitinib-sensitive NSCLC cell lines
including those harboring EGFR mutations. Thus, combined HDAC inhibitor and
gefitinib treatment represents a novel pharmacologic strategy for overcoming
resistance to EGFR inhibitors in patients with lung cancer.

PMID: 16424029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Nov;58(4):1102-13.

Two different polyketide synthase genes are required for synthesis of zearalenone
in Gibberella zeae.

Kim YT(1), Lee YR, Jin J, Han KH, Kim H, Kim JC, Lee T, Yun SH, Lee YW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agricultural Biotechnology and Center for Agricultural Biomaterials,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-921, Korea.

Zearalenone (ZEA) is a polyketide mycotoxin produced by some species of
Gibberella/Fusarium and causes hyperestrogenic syndrome in animals. ZEA occurs
naturally in cereals infected by Gibberella zeae in temperate regions and
threatens animal health. In this study, we report on a set of genes that
participate in the biosynthesis of ZEA in G. zeae. Focusing on the non-reducing
polyketide synthase (PKS) genes of the G. zeae genome, we demonstrated that PKS13
is required for ZEA production. Subsequent analyses revealed that a continuous,
50 kb segment of DNA carrying PKS13 consisted of three additional open reading
frames that were coexpressed as a cluster during the condition for ZEA
biosynthesis. These genes, in addition to PKS13, were essential for the ZEA
biosynthesis. They include another PKS gene (PKS4) encoding a fungal reducing
PKS; zearalenone biosynthesis gene 1 (ZEB1), which shows a high similarity to
putative isoamyl alcohol oxidase genes; and ZEB2 whose deduced product carries a 
conserved, basic-region leucine zipper domain. ZEB1 is responsible for the
chemical conversion of beta-zearalenonol (beta-ZOL) to ZEA in the biosynthetic
pathway, and ZEB2 controls transcription of the cluster members. Transcription of
these genes was strongly influenced by different culture conditions such as
nutrient starvations and ambient pH. Furthermore, the same set of genes regulated
by ZEB2 was dramatically repressed in the transgenic G. zeae strain with the
deletion of PKS13 or PKS4 but not in the ZEB1 deletion strain, suggesting that
ZEA or beta-ZOL may be involved in transcriptional activation of the gene cluster
required for ZEA biosynthesis in G. zeae. This is the first published report on
the molecular characterization of genes required for ZEA biosynthesis.

PMID: 16262793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Nov;77(5):694-708. Epub 2005 Sep 14.

Mutations in TCF8 cause posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy and ectopic
expression of COL4A3 by corneal endothelial cells.

Krafchak CM(1), Pawar H, Moroi SE, Sugar A, Lichter PR, Mackey DA, Mian S, Nairus
T, Elner V, Schteingart MT, Downs CA, Kijek TG, Johnson JM, Trager EH, Rozsa FW, 
Mandal MN, Epstein MP, Vollrath D, Ayyagari R, Boehnke M, Richards JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, W. K. Kellogg Eye Center,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD, also known as PPMD) is a rare
disease involving metaplasia and overgrowth of corneal endothelial cells. In
patients with PPCD, these cells manifest in an epithelial morphology and gene
expression pattern, produce an aberrant basement membrane, and, sometimes, spread
over the iris and nearby structures in a way that increases the risk for
glaucoma. We previously mapped PPCD to a region (PPCD3) on chromosome 10
containing the gene that encodes the two-handed zinc-finger homeodomain
transcription factor TCF8. Here, we report a heterozygous frameshift mutation in 
TCF8 that segregates with PPCD in the family used to map PPCD3 and four different
heterozygous nonsense and frameshift mutations in TCF8 in four other PPCD
probands. Family reports of inguinal hernia, hydrocele, and possible bone
anomalies in affected individuals suggest that individuals with TCF8 mutations
should be examined for nonocular anomalies. We detect transcripts of all three
identified PPCD genes (VSX1, COL8A2, and TCF8) in the cornea. We show presence of
a complex (core plus secondary) binding site for TCF8 in the promoter of Alport
syndrome gene COL4A3, which encodes collagen type IV alpha 3, and we present
immunohistochemical evidence of ectopic expression of COL4A3 in corneal
endothelium of the proband of the original PPCD3 family. Identification of TCF8
as the PPCD3 gene provides a valuable tool for the study of critical gene
regulation events in PPCD pathology and suggests a possible role for TCF8
mutations in altered structure and function of cells lining body cavities other
than the anterior chamber of the eye. Thus, this study has identified TCF8 as the
gene responsible for approximately half of the cases of PPCD, has implicated TCF8
mutations in developmental abnormalities outside the eye, and has presented the
TCF8 regulatory target, COL4A3, as a key, shared molecular component of two
different diseases, PPCD and Alport syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1271382
PMID: 16252232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Nov 15;14(22):3361-70. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

E-cadherin and vitamin D receptor regulation by SNAIL and ZEB1 in colon cancer:
clinicopathological correlations.

Peña C(1), García JM, Silva J, García V, Rodríguez R, Alonso I, Millán I, Salas
C, de Herreros AG, Muñoz A, Bonilla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro,
Madrid, Spain.

E-cadherin (CDH1) gene expression is strictly regulated. The transcriptional
factors SNAIL and ZEB1 are involved in its repression, whereas activation of
vitamin D receptor (VDR) by vitamin D induces its transcription. We study the
expression and functional correlation of SNAIL, CDH1, VDR and ZEB1 genes and
examine their possible involvement in colon cancer. The expression of these four 
genes was measured by real time-PCR in 114 patients with colorectal cancer, and
tumor characteristics were analyzed in each patient. SNAIL expression was
associated with downregulation of CDH1 (P < 0.001) and VDR (P < 0.001) gene
products. We also found a positive correlation between CDH1 and VDR expressions. 
However, the association between SNAIL and CDH1 was not found in patients with
high expression of ZEB1. We observed a correlation between downregulation of: a) 
ZEB1 and presence of polyps in surgical resections; b) VDR and poor
differentiation and c) CDH1 and poor differentiation, vascular invasion, presence
of lymph node metastases and advanced stages; as well as a trend toward a
correlation between SNAIL expression in tumors and vascular invasion. The
correlations between SNAIL, CDH1, VDR and ZEB1 and the association between
reduced expression of CDH1 and VDR and aggressive tumor characteristics emphasize
the value of analyzing these genes in colon cancer patients for prognostic
purposes and for predicting response to possible therapies with vitamin D or its 
analogs.

PMID: 16203744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. FEBS Lett. 2005 Aug 29;579(21):4610-4.

Defective binding of transcriptional repressor ZEB via DNA methylation
contributes to increased constitutive levels of p73 in Fanconi anemia cells.

Pipaon C(1), Real PJ, Fernandez-Luna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla,
Edificio Escuela Universitaria de Enfermeria, Servicio Cantabro de Salud, Av.
Valdecilla s/n, 39008 Santander, Spain.

Little is known about the molecular mediators of the Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway 
involved in the machinery that maintains genomic integrity. Here, we report that 
the levels of p73 and its target genes, are increased in cells derived from FA
patients belonging to complementation group A (FA-A). Moreover, functional
correction of FA-A cells by gene transfer reduces the expression of p73. We also 
demonstrate that DNA methylation contributes to increased levels of p73 in FA-A
cells by hampering the binding of the transcriptional repressor ZEB to an
intronic regulatory region of the p73 gene. Together, our data may help explain
the susceptibility of these cells to DNA damaging agents.

PMID: 16087177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 2005 Nov 10;24(49):7273-80.

deltaEF1 repressor controls selectively p53 family members during
differentiation.

Fontemaggi G(1), Gurtner A, Damalas A, Costanzo A, Higashi Y, Sacchi A, Strano S,
Piaggio G, Blandino G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, 00158
Rome, Italy.

The discovery of two new p53 homologs, p73 and p63, has defined a family of
transcription factors heavily involved in the control of growth suppression,
apoptosis, differentiation and development. While p53-deficient mice undergo
spontaneous tumors, p73 and p63 knockout mice exhibit severe developmental
defects. We demonstrate here that p73 gene is an in vivo transcriptional target
of the muscle regulatory factors MyoD, myogenin, Myf5 and Myf6. Ectopic
expression of the transcriptional repressor deltaEF1/ZEB/zfhx1a counteracts
MyoD/Myf5- or MyoD/Myf6-mediated transcriptional activation of p73. A distinct
pattern of in vivo recruitment of muscle regulatory factors and deltaEF1 on p73
regulatory regions was found between proliferating and differentiating muscle
cells. We also found that deltaEF1 plays a role in the transcriptional regulation
of p53 family members during keratinocytic differentiation. Mouse embryo
fibroblasts derived from deltaEF1-deficient mice exhibit unbalanced expression of
DeltaNp63, TAp73 and DeltaNp73 but not of TAp63 and p53. The analysis of tissues 
derived from deltaEF1+/- mice exhibit a selective enrichment of DeltaNp63 in
skin.

PMID: 16007124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Oncogene. 2005 Mar 31;24(14):2375-85.

DeltaEF1 is a transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin and regulates epithelial
plasticity in breast cancer cells.

Eger A(1), Aigner K, Sonderegger S, Dampier B, Oehler S, Schreiber M, Berx G,
Cano A, Beug H, Foisner R.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University Department at the Vienna Biocenter,
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
andreas.eger@univie.ac.at

Downregulation of E-cadherin is a crucial event for epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in embryonic development and cancer progression. Using the
EpFosER mammary tumour model we show that during EMT, upregulation of the
transcriptional regulator deltaEF1 coincided with transcriptional repression of
E-cadherin. Ectopic expression of deltaEF1 in epithelial cells was sufficient to 
downregulate E-cadherin and to induce EMT. Analysis of E-cadherin promoter
activity and chromatin immunoprecipitation identified deltaEF1 as direct
transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin. In human cancer cells, transcript levels
of deltaEF1 correlated directly with the extent of E-cadherin repression and loss
of the epithelial phenotype. The protein was enriched in nuclei of human cancer
cells and physically associated with the E-cadherin promoter. RNA
interference-mediated downregulation of deltaEF1 in cancer cells was sufficient
to derepress E-cadherin expression and restore cell to cell adhesion, suggesting 
that deltaEF1 is a key player in late stage carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15674322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Lab Invest. 2004 Oct;84(10):1372-86.

Tumor-associated E-cadherin mutations do not induce Wnt target gene expression,
but affect E-cadherin repressors.

Laux H(1), Tomer R, Mader MT, Smida J, Budczies J, Kappler R, Hahn H, Blöchinger 
M, Schnitzbauer U, Eckardt-Schupp F, Höfler H, Becker KF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technical University, Munich, Germany.

E-cadherin is a cell-cell adhesion molecule and tumor invasion suppressor gene
that is frequently altered in human cancers. It interacts through its cytoplasmic
domain with beta-catenin which in turn interacts with the Wnt (wingless)
signaling pathway. We have compared the effects of different tumor-derived
E-cadherin variants with those of normal E-cadherin on Wnt signaling and on genes
involved in epithelial mesenchymal transition. We established an in-house cDNA
microarray composed of 1105 different, sequence verified cDNA probes
corresponding to 899 unique genes that represent the majority of genes known to
be involved in cadherin-dependent cell adhesion and signaling
('Adhesion/Signaling Array'). The expression signatures of E-cadherin-negative
MDA-MB-435S cancer cells transfected with E-cadherin variants (in frame deletions
of exon 8 or 9, D8 or D9, respectively, or a point mutation in exon 8 (D370A))
were compared to that of wild-type E-cadherin (WT) transfected cells. From the
differentially expressed genes, we selected 38 that we subsequently analyzed by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR and/or Northern Blot. A total of 92% of these were 
confirmed as differentially expressed. Most of these genes encode proteins of the
cytoskeleton, cadherins/integrins, oncogenes and matrix metalloproteases. No
significant expression differences of genes downstream of the Wnt-pathway were
found, except in E-cadherin D8 transfected cells where upregulation of three
Tcf/Lef-transcribed genes was seen. One possible reason for the lack of
expression differences of the Tcf/Lef-regulated genes is upregulation of SFRP1
and SFRP3; both of which are competitive inhibitors of the Wnt proteins.
Interestingly, known E-cadherin transcriptional repressors, such as SLUG (SNAI2),
SIP1 (ZEB2), TWIST1, SNAIL (SNAI1) and ZEB1 (TCF8), but not E12/E47 (TCF3), had a
lack of upregulation in cells expressing mutated E-cadherin compared to WT. In
conclusion, E-cadherin mutations have no influence on expression of genes
involved in Wnt-signaling, but they may promote their own expression by blocking 
upregulation of E-cadherin repressors.

PMID: 15311212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(14):6151-61.

Regulation of collagen type I in vascular smooth muscle cells by competition
between Nkx2.5 and deltaEF1/ZEB1.

Ponticos M(1), Partridge T, Black CM, Abraham DJ, Bou-Gharios G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University College of London,
United Kingdom.

A major component of the vessel wall of large arteries and veins is the
extracellular matrix (ECM), which consists of collagens, elastin, and
proteoglycans. Collagen type I is one of the most abundant of the ECM proteins.
We have previously shown that the pro-collagen type I alpha 2 gene contains an
enhancer which confers tissue-specific expression in the majority of
collagen-producing cells, including blood vessels. In this paper, we delineate a 
specific vascular smooth muscle cell (vSMC) element: a 100-bp sequence around
-16.6 kb upstream of the transcription start site that regulates collagen
expression exclusively in vSMCs. Furthermore, we show that the expression is
activated through the binding of the homeodomain protein Nkx2.5, which is further
potentiated in the presence of GATA6. In contrast, this element was repressed by 
the binding of the zinc-finger protein deltaEF1/ZEB1. We propose a model of
regulation where the activating transcription factor Nkx2.5 and the repressor
deltaEF1/ZEB1 compete for an overlapping DNA binding site. This element is
important in understanding the molecular mechanisms of vessel remodeling and is a
potential target for intervention in vascular diseases where there is excessive
deposition of collagen in the vessel wall.

PMCID: PMC434261
PMID: 15226419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. DNA Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;23(1):25-34.

Transcriptional activation by the zinc-finger homeodomain protein delta EF1 in
estrogen signaling cascades.

Dillner NB(1), Sanders MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

The transcription factor delta EF1 is a key player in estrogen-signaling cascades
in vertebrates. In this pathway, estrogen induces the expression of the gene
encoding delta EF1, and then delta EF1 activates transcription of downstream
targets. Yet, the molecular mechanisms of transcriptional activation by delta EF1
have remained obscure. Furthermore, most work has concentrated on the capacity of
delta EF1 to repress gene expression, rather than its ability to activate
transcription. To investigate this activation potential in an endogenous
signaling pathway, we characterized ovalbumin (Ov) gene induction by delta EF1.
Gel mobility shift assays demonstrate that delta EF1 binds to the 5' flanking
region of the Ov gene at two sites, one at -810 to -806 and one at -152 to -148
with respect to the start point of transcription. Correspondingly, these sites
are required for induction by estrogen or by delta EF1 in transfection
experiments. Furthermore, the activation potential of delta EF1 is not restricted
to the chick homolog, as the human ZEB and the mouse delta EF1 homologs also
induce Ov gene expression. To characterize the molecular mechanisms whereby delta
EF1 activates gene expression, its C-terminal acidic domain was deleted and shown
to be necessary for activation of transcription. Furthermore, the acidic domain
has intrinsic activation potential, as it can induce the heterologous thymidine
kinase promoter. These data establish delta EF1 as an activator of transcription 
whose action may be DNA-context and cell-type specific, but not species specific.

PMID: 14965470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16057-63. Epub 2004 Feb 4.

Characterization of proteins binding to E-box/Ku86 sites and function of Ku86 in 
transcriptional regulation of the human xanthine oxidoreductase gene.

Xu P(1), LaVallee PA, Lin JJ, Hoidal JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Respiratory, Critical Care and
Occupational Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center and Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

We reported previously that E-box and TATA-like elements repress human xanthine
oxidoreductase gene (hXOR) expression. In the present investigation, we
determined the means by which the E-box site functions in this basal repression. 
DNA affinity purification demonstrated that at least five proteins are involved
in the nuclear protein complex binding to the E-box and adjacent Ku86-binding
sites. Amino acid sequence analysis demonstrated that three proteins, DNA-PK
catalytic subunit, Ku86, and Ku70 are components of DNA-dependent protein kinase 
(DNA-PK). By electrophoretic mobility shift assays, gel-shift, and site-directed 
mutagenesis, we confirmed Ku86 binding to the Ku86 site. Studies indicated that
the other two proteins of the complex are AREB6-like proteins binding to the
E-box. Pull-down and immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated the binding of
Ku86 to AREB6-like proteins. The functional loss of Ku86 increases hXOR promoter 
activity and transcript expression. Based on the findings, we propose that
DNA-PK/AREB6-like proteins play a central role in repression of basal hXOR
activity. AREB6-like proteins specifically bind to the E-box, whereas Ku86 binds 
an adjacent site and recruits DNA-PK catalytic subunit and Ku70 proteins. A
working model is presented to account for the role of DNA-PK and AREB6-like
proteins in regulating hXOR activity.

PMID: 14761964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 2;100(18):10429-34. Epub 2003 Aug 22.

WNT7a induces E-cadherin in lung cancer cells.

Ohira T(1), Gemmill RM, Ferguson K, Kusy S, Roche J, Brambilla E, Zeng C, Baron
A, Bemis L, Erickson P, Wilder E, Rustgi A, Kitajewski J, Gabrielson E, Bremnes
R, Franklin W, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Biometrics/Preventive Medicine,
University of Colorado Health Sciences and Cancer Centers, 4200 East 9th Avenue, 
Denver, CO 80262, USA.

E-cadherin loss in cancer is associated with de-differentiation, invasion, and
metastasis. Drosophila DE-cadherin is regulated by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling,
although this has not been demonstrated in mammalian cells. We previously
reported that expression of WNT7a, encoded on 3p25, was frequently downregulated 
in lung cancer, and that loss of E-cadherin or beta-catenin was a poor prognostic
feature. Here we show that WNT7a both activates E-cadherin expression via a
beta-catenin specific mechanism in lung cancer cells and is involved in a
positive feedback loop. Li+, a GSK3 beta inhibitor, led to E-cadherin induction
in an inositol-independent manner. Similarly, exposure to mWNT7a specifically
induced free beta-catenin and E-cadherin. Among known transcriptional suppressors
of E-cadherin, ZEB1 was uniquely correlated with E-cadherin loss in lung cancer
cell lines, and its inhibition by RNA interference resulted in E-cadherin
induction. Pharmacologic reversal of E-cadherin and WNT7a losses was achieved
with Li+, histone deacetylase inhibition, or in some cases only with combined
inhibitors. Our findings provide support that E-cadherin induction by
WNT/beta-catenin signaling is an evolutionarily conserved pathway operative in
lung cancer cells, and that loss of WNT7a expression may be important in lung
cancer development or progression by its effects on E-cadherin.

PMCID: PMC193578
PMID: 12937339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. EMBO J. 2003 May 15;22(10):2453-62.

Regulation of Smad signaling through a differential recruitment of coactivators
and corepressors by ZEB proteins.

Postigo AA(1), Depp JL, Taylor JJ, Kroll KL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. apostigo@im.wustl.edu

Balancing signals derived from the TGFbeta family is crucial for regulating cell 
proliferation and differentiation, and in establishing the embryonic axis during 
development. TGFbeta/BMP signaling leads to the activation and nuclear
translocation of Smad proteins, which activate transcription of specific target
genes by recruiting P/CAF and p300. The two members of the ZEB family of zinc
finger factors (ZEB-1/deltaEF1 and ZEB-2/SIP1) regulate TGFbeta/BMP signaling in 
opposite ways: ZEB-1/deltaEF1 synergizes with Smad-mediated transcriptional
activation, while ZEB-2/SIP1 represses it. Here we report that these antagonistic
effects by the ZEB proteins arise from the differential recruitment of
transcriptional coactivators (p300 and P/CAF) and corepressors (CtBP) to the
Smads. Thus, while ZEB-1/deltaEF1 binds to p300 and promotes the formation of a
p300-Smad transcriptional complex, ZEB-2/SIP1 acts as a repressor by recruiting
CtBP. This model of regulation by ZEB proteins also functions in vivo, where they
have opposing effects on the regulation of TGFbeta family-dependent genes during 
Xenopus development.

PMCID: PMC155984
PMID: 12743039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EMBO J. 2003 May 15;22(10):2443-52.

Opposing functions of ZEB proteins in the regulation of the TGFbeta/BMP signaling
pathway.

Postigo AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. apostigo@im.wustl.edu

Binding of TGFbeta/BMP factors to their receptors leads to translocation of Smad 
proteins to the nucleus where they activate transcription of target genes. The
two-handed zinc finger proteins encoded by Zfhx1a and Zfhx1b, ZEB-1/deltaEF1 and 
ZEB-2/SIP1, respectively, regulate gene expression and differentiation programs
in a number of tissues. Here I demonstrate that ZEB proteins are also crucial
regulators of TGFbeta/BMP signaling with opposing effects on this pathway. Both
ZEB proteins bind to Smads, but while ZEB-1/deltaEF1 synergizes with Smad
proteins to activate transcription, promote osteoblastic differentiation and
induce cell growth arrest, the highly related ZEB-2/SIP1 protein has the opposite
effect. Finally, the ability of TGFbeta to mediate transcription of
TGFbeta-dependent genes and induce growth arrest depends on the presence of
endogenous ZEB-1/deltaEF1 protein.

PMCID: PMC155983
PMID: 12743038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Seikagaku. 2003 Jan;75(1):27-36.

[Function of zfhx1 family and molecular genetic analysis of its deficiency].

[Article in Japanese]

Higashi Y(1), Wakamatsu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, 
Osaka University, 1-3 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871.

PMID: 12645130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Virol. 2003 Jan;77(1):199-207.

ZEB negatively regulates the lytic-switch BZLF1 gene promoter of Epstein-Barr
virus.

Kraus RJ(1), Perrigoue JG, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706-1599, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a human herpesvirus capable of establishing a latent 
state in B lymphocytes. The product of the immediate-early BZLF1 gene, Zta, is a 
transcriptional transactivator essential for viral DNA amplification and virion
production. Previously, we identified a negative cis-acting element within the
BZLF1 promoter termed ZV. ZV contains the sequence 5'-CAGGTA-3' located at
nucleotides -17 to -12 relative to the transcription initiation site. It sequence
specifically binds a cellular factor, ZVR. Based on sequence binding specificity,
we postulated that ZVR may be zinc finger E-box binding factor (ZEB) or a related
zinc finger/homeodomain family member. We show here by immunoshift assays that
ZVR and human ZEB specifically cross-react with an antibody to deltaEF1, the
chicken homolog of ZEB. Competition electrophoretic mobility shift assays
confirmed that ZEB binds to the ZV element with the same binding specificity as
ZVR. Overexpression of ZEB in either B-lymphocytic DG75 cells or mammary
epithelial MCF-7 cells repressed Zta-induced activation of the BZLF1 promoter
four- to fivefold via the ZV site. Thus, we conclude that the previously
identified cellular repressor ZVR is, in fact, ZEB. We also present evidence that
other cellular factors likely affect the transcriptional activity of ZEB. Lastly,
we identify a ZEB-binding site within the promoter of the lytic BRLF1 gene of
EBV. We postulate that ZEB likely plays an important role in regulating the life 
cycle of EBV.

PMCID: PMC140584
PMID: 12477825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 16;296(2):368-73.

Cell-specific phosphorylation of Zfhep transcription factor.

Costantino ME(1), Stearman RP, Smith GE, Darling DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
Health Sciences Center, 501 South Preston St., Room 315, Louisville, KY 40292,
USA.

Zinc finger homeodomain enhancer-binding protein (Zfhep/Zfhx1a) is a
transcription factor essential for immune system development, skeletal
patterning, and life. Regulation of the interleukin-2 gene in T cells has been
suggested to depend on post-translational processing of Zfhep, however, no
modifications of Zfhep are known. Here we demonstrate that Zfhep is present in
both hyperphosphorylated and hypophosphorylated forms. Western blot analysis
demonstrates two forms of Zfhep with different mobilities. Differences in
phosphorylation are sufficient to explain the difference in mobilities. Zfhep is 
primarily phosphorylated on Ser and Thr residues since PP2A dephosphorylates the 
slower mobility band. Treatment of nuclear extract with O-GlcNAcase did not
detect O-linked sugar. Importantly, post-translational processing is
cell-specific. Doublets of Zfhep were detected in five cell lines, whereas 6 cell
lines contain only, or predominantly, non-phosphorylated Zfhep, and Saos-2 cells 
contain predominantly the phosphorylated form. These data provide the first
demonstration that Zfhep is post-translationally modified.

PMCID: PMC3682420
PMID: 12163027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 18;277(42):39209-16. Epub 2002 Aug 2.

Snail induction of epithelial to mesenchymal transition in tumor cells is
accompanied by MUC1 repression and ZEB1 expression.

Guaita S(1), Puig I, Franci C, Garrido M, Dominguez D, Batlle E, Sancho E, Dedhar
S, De Herreros AG, Baulida J.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain.

E-cadherin protein plays a key role in the establishment and maintenance of
adherent junctions. Recent evidence implicates the transcription factor Snail in 
the blockage of E-cadherin expression in fibroblasts and some epithelial tumor
cells through direct binding to three E-boxes in the E-cadherin promoter.
Transfection of Snail into epithelial cells leads to a more fibroblastic
phenotype. Cells expressing Snail presented a scattered flattened phenotype with 
low intercellular contacts. Other epithelial markers like Cytokeratin 18 or MUC1 
were also repressed. The effects of Snail on MUC1 transcription were mediated by 
two E-boxes present in the proximal promoter. Snail also induced expression of
the mesenchymal markers fibronectin and LEF1 and the transcription repressor
ZEB1. ZEB1 and Snail had a similar pattern of expression in epithelial cell
lines, and both were induced by overexpression of ILK1, a kinase that causes the 
loss of E-cadherin and the acquisition of a fibroblastic phenotype. Snail
overexpression in several cell lines raised ZEB1 RNA levels and increased the
activity of ZEB1 promoter. ZEB1 could also repress E-cadherin and MUC1 promoters 
but less strongly than Snail. However, since ZEB1 expression persisted after
Snail was down-regulated, ZEB1 may regulate epithelial genes in several tumor
cell lines.

PMID: 12161443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Hum Reprod. 2002 Mar;8(3):262-70.

Control of the human inhibin alpha chain promoter in cytotrophoblast cells
differentiating into syncytium.

Debieve F(1), Thomas K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecological Endocrinology, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. debieve@obst.ucl.ac.be

Inhibins are dimeric proteins consisting of a common alpha subunit linked to one 
of the beta subunits, beta A or beta B. During pregnancy, the placenta is the
main source of inhibin A production and the in-vitro transformation of
cytotrophoblast cells into syncytium is associated with an inhibin alpha subunit 
mRNA up-regulation. In this study, the 5' region of the human inhibin alpha gene 
was isolated and sequenced. Three transcription initiation sites were identified.
When transiently transfected in trophoblast cells with a luciferase reporter
vector, the sequence displayed promoter activity. DNase I footprinting and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) analysis showed a specific
DNA-protein interaction in the promoter when using cytotrophoblast nuclear
proteins. This interaction was weaker with syncytiotrophoblast nuclear proteins. 
Moreover, the deletion of this DNA-protein interaction region suppressed the
promoter activity. In an attempt to identify this factor, the potential binding
of known factors delta EF1, AP1 and NFE2 were excluded by competition EMSA
experiments. We suggest that it may correspond to an undescribed protein
interaction. The identification of the human inhibin alpha promoter could help in
understanding the mechanisms modulating inhibin gene transcription. Moreover, the
identification of a factor, whose presence is related to the trophoblast cell
differentiation state, could help in understanding the transformation of
cytotrophoblast cells into syncytium.

PMID: 11870234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Science. 2002 Mar 8;295(5561):1895-7. Epub 2002 Feb 14.

Regulation of corepressor function by nuclear NADH.

Zhang Q(1), Piston DW, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park 
Road, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

The corepressor CtBP (carboxyl-terminal binding protein) is involved in
transcriptional pathways important for development, cell cycle regulation, and
transformation. We demonstrate that CtBP binding to cellular and viral
transcriptional repressors is regulated by the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides
NAD+ and NADH, with NADH being two to three orders of magnitude more effective.
Levels of free nuclear nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides, determined using
two-photon microscopy, correspond to the levels required for half-maximal CtBP
binding and are considerably lower than those previously reported. Agents capable
of increasing NADH levels stimulate CtBP binding to its partners in vivo and
potentiate CtBP-mediated repression. We propose that this ability to detect
changes in nuclear NAD+/NADH ratio allows CtBP to serve as a redox sensor for
transcription.

PMID: 11847309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 Nov 30;96(1-2):59-67.

Developmental and functional evidence of a role for Zfhep in neural cell
development.

Yen G(1), Croci A, Dowling A, Zhang S, Zoeller RT, Darling DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, School of
Dentistry, University of Louisville, 501 South Preston Street, Room 315,
Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

The rat Zfhep gene encodes a member of the Zfh family of transcription factors
having a homeodomain-like sequence and multiple zinc fingers. We examined
expression of Zfhep in the rat forebrain during embryonic and postnatal
development. Zfhep mRNA was strongly expressed in the progenitor cells of the
ventricular zone around the lateral ventricles on E14 and E16, but showed little 
expression in cells that had migrated to form the developing cortex. Dual
labeling with PCNA demonstrated expression of Zfhep mRNA in proliferating cells. 
Expression of Zfhep in the ventricular zone decreases during late development as 
the population of progenitor cells decreases. This pattern is distinctly
different from other members of the Zfh family. We also examined the expression
of Zfhep protein during retinoic acid-induced neurogenesis of P19 embryonal
carcinoma cells. Zfhep is highly expressed in P19 neuroblasts, and expression
decreases by the time of morphological neurogenesis. Hence, both P19 cells and
embryonic brain demonstrate a loss of Zfhep expression during the transition from
proliferating precursor to differentiated neural cells. We investigated a
possible link between Zfhep and proliferation by treating human glial cell lines 
with Zfhep antisense phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotides. Two Zfhep antisense 
oligonucleotides repressed proliferation of either U-138 or U-343 glioblastoma
cells more than control oligonucleotides. Based on the expression patterns of
Zfhep in vivo and in the P19 cell model of neurogenesis, we suggest that Zfhep
may play a role in proliferation or differentiation of neural cells.

PMID: 11731009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(24):8461-70.

The transcriptional repressor ZEB regulates p73 expression at the crossroad
between proliferation and differentiation.

Fontemaggi G(1), Gurtner A, Strano S, Higashi Y, Sacchi A, Piaggio G, Blandino G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Via delle
Messe d'Oro, 156, 00158 Rome, Italy.

The newly discovered p73 gene encodes a nuclear protein that has high homology
with p53. Furthermore, ectopic expression of p73 in p53(+/+) and p53(-/-) cancer 
cells recapitulates some of the biological activities of p53 such as growth
arrest, apoptosis, and differentiation. p73(-/-)-deficient mice exhibit severe
defects in proper development of the central nervous system and pheromone sensory
pathway. They also suffer from inflammation and infections. Here we studied the
transcriptional regulation of p73 at the crossroad between proliferation and
differentiation. p73 mRNA is undetectable in proliferating C2C12 cells and is
expressed at very low levels in undifferentiated P19 and HL60 cells. Conversely, 
it is upregulated during muscle and neuronal differentiation as well as in
response to tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate-induced monocytic differentiation of
HL60 cells. We identified a 1-kb regulatory fragment located within the first
intron of p73, which is positioned immediately upstream to the ATG codon of the
second exon. This fragment exerts silencer activity on p73 as well as on
heterologous promoters. The p73 intronic fragment contains six consensus binding 
sites for transcriptional repressor ZEB, which binds these sites in vitro and in 
vivo. Ectopic expression of dominant-negative ZEB (ZEB-DB) restores p73
expression in proliferating C2C12 and P19 cells. Thus, transcriptional repression
of p73 expression by ZEB binding may contribute to the modulation of p73
expression during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC100009
PMID: 11713281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biochem. 2001 Apr;129(4):635-41.

Tip60 is a cell-type-specific transcriptional regulator.

Hlubek F(1), Löhberg C, Meiler J, Jung A, Kirchner T, Brabletz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Krankenhausstr.
8-10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Tip60 was originally identified as cellular HIV-Tat interacting protein and has
been shown to augment Tat-dependent transcription. It has also been shown to
interact with various cellular transcription factors and to belong to the nuclear
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) family. To further elucidate the function of
Tip60 and its HAT domain in transcription regulation, we compared Tip60 activity 
in HeLa and Jurkat T lymphoma cells. Here we show that Tip60 augments the HIV-1
Tat activity at the HIV-LTR promoter in HeLa but inhibits it in Jurkat cells.
Moreover, we isolated two new variants of the Tip60 protein (Tip60Delta1,
Tip60Delta2) from Jurkat cells. The Tip60Delta2 variant lacks the entire HAT
domain but modulates HIV-1 Tat activity like full-length Tip60. In addition,
Tip60 and the transcriptional repressor ZEB (zinc finger E box binding protein)
interact specifically in the yeast two-hybrid system and additively inhibit the
CD4 enhancer/promoter activity in Jurkat cells. Thus, Tip60 may function as
corepressor of the ZEB protein. In summary, these data show that Tip60 functions 
as a cell-type-specific transcriptional regulator and that the HAT domain is not 
required for either transcriptional activation or inhibition. This indicates that
Tip60 may function by recruiting additional cell-type-specific cofactors.

PMID: 11275565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83-A Suppl 1(Pt 1):S40-7.

SIP1 (Smad interacting protein 1) and deltaEF1 (delta-crystallin enhancer binding
factor) are structurally similar transcriptional repressors.

van Grunsven LA(1), Schellens A, Huylebroeck D, Verschueren K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Smad proteins are intracellular mediators of transforming growth
factor-beta (TGFbeta) signalling that regulate gene expression by interacting
with different classes of transcription factors including DNA-binding multi-zinc 
finger proteins. One of these, Smad interacting protein 1 (SIP1), is a novel
two-handed zinc-finger protein that displays strong similarity with the
transcriptional repressor delta-crystallin enhancer binding factor (deltaEF1).
Here, we summarize what is known about the mechanism of action of both proteins
and their role in vertebrate embryogenesis. Our data are discussed together with 
the present knowledge on other zinc-finger containing Smad interacting proteins.
METHODS: The activities and function of SIP1 have been analysed through
documentation of expression patterns, the effect of over-expression of SIP1 on
target-gene expression, and promoter studies using Xenopus embryos. Moreover,
S1P1/Smad complexes and their association with target promoter DNA were analyzed 
in biochemical studies.
RESULTS: SIP1 is a transcriptional repressor displaying overlapping DNA binding
specificities with deltaEF1. An in vivo target of SIP1 in Xenopus is a gene
required for the formation of mesoderm, Brachyury (XBra). Our data indicate that 
SIP1 is required to confine XBra gene expression to the mesoderm. Furthermore,
the expression pattern in Xenopus invites us to speculate that SIP1 plays a role 
in specification/differentiation of neuroectoderm. Unlike deltaEF1, SIP1 can bind
directly to activated receptor regulated Smads (R-Smads) and recruit them to the 
DNA. This indicates that Smads may modulate the activity of SIP1 as a
transcriptional repressor.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data point to a role of SIP1 in developmental processes
regulated by members of the TGFbeta family such as induction of mesoderm
(mediated through activin-like signalling) and inhibition of neuroectoderm
formation (mediated by bone morphogenetic proteins [BMPs]). Whereas SIP1 could
act in TGFbeta signal transduction by virtue of interaction with activated
R-Smads, genetic studies in the mouse indicate that deltaEF1 may act in certain
TGFbeta pathways-i.e., BMPs and growth and differentiation factors (GDFs)-as
well. The molecular mechanisms by which these transcriptional repressors act, as 
well as the function of the SIP1/Smad interaction, remain to be elucidated.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Mutations in components of the TGFbeta signalling pathways
have been associated with disease and congenital malformations. We anticipate
that identification of Smad interacting transcription factors including SIP1 and 
their targets will help us to understand the molecular basis of certain
pathologies.

PMID: 11263664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Growth Differ. 2000 Aug;42(4):367-76.

Suppression of polydactyly of the Gli3 mutant (extra toes) by deltaEF1 homozygous
mutation.

Moribe H(1), Takagi T, Kondoh H, Higashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

Digit patterning is established through multiple genetic interactions.
Delta-crystallin enhancer/E2-box factor (deltaEF1) is a zinc finger and
homeodomain containing repressor protein, and is expressed in the posterior half 
of the forelimb bud and in the entire hindlimb bud during the early stage of limb
development. The 6EF1-deficient mutant mice display various skeletal
abnormalities, among which inferior ossification and abnormal patterning of
autopodial bones are similar to those observed in Hox and Gli gene mutants. Gli3 
mutant mice, extra toes (Xt), exhibit pre-axial polydactyly losing the identity
of digit I. It is demonstrated here that deltaEF1null(lacZ) homozygosity
suppressed formation of the extra digit, uniquely of the hindlimb, in both
Gli3XtJ heterozygous and homozygous mutants, but with no restoration of digit I
identity. In Gli3XtJ mutants, the Hoxd13 expression domain was expanded more
dramatically in homozygotes. In Gli3XtJ;deltaEF1null(lacZ) double homozygous
mutants, Hoxd13 expression once expanded in Gli3XtJ homozygous mutant was
reduced, more conspicuously in the hindlimbs, which may account for
hindlimb-restricted suppression of formation of the extra digit. The data suggest
the possibility that the extent of Hoxd13 expression along the distal margin of
the limb bud is determinative in defining the digit number.

PMID: 10969736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncogene. 2000 Aug 3;19(33):3823-8.

Evidence for a function of CtBP in epithelial gene regulation and anoikis.

Grooteclaes ML(1), Frisch SM.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Previously, we reported that adenovirus E1a protein behaves as a tumor suppressor
in human cells. It apparently functions by transcriptionally inducing an array of
epithelial cell adhesion genes, while repressing other cell-type specific genes, 
thus producing an epithelial phenotype. Concomitantly, the cells become sensitive
to anoikis (apoptosis of epithelial cells detached from extracellular matrix),
potentially causing tumor suppression. E1a protein interacts with the nuclear
acetylases p300, CBP and P/CAF, and also with the co-repressor protein CtBP. In
this study, we have determined the role of these interactions in E1a's phenotypic
effects on human tumor cells. The results indicate that E1a's interaction with
CtBP activates at least three epithelial cell adhesion gene promoters. The
E-cadherin repressor appeared to be the CtBP-interacting protein delta EF1/ZEB,
which bound the ras-repressible E-boxes of the E-cadherin promoter. The E1a-CtBP 
interaction also contributed to anoikis-sensitization. E1a's interactions with
the nuclear acetylases conferred epithelial morphologies but did not activate
epithelial genes. These latter interactions did not sensitize tumor cells to
anoikis but nevertheless conferred tumor suppression. These results implicate
CtBP as an antagonist of the epithelial phenotype and anoikis. They also indicate
a new but undefined role for nuclear acetylases in maintaining the transformed
phenotype.

PMID: 10949939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8581-90.

Identification of CtBP1 and CtBP2 as corepressors of zinc finger-homeodomain
factor deltaEF1.

Furusawa T(1), Moribe H, Kondoh H, Higashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

deltaEF1, a representative of the zinc finger-homeodomain protein family, is a
transcriptional repressor which binds E2-box (CACCTG) and related sequences and
counteracts the activators through transrepression mechanisms. It has been shown 
that the N-proximal region of the protein is involved in the transrepression.
Here we demonstrate that deltaEF1 has a second mechanism of transrepression
recruiting CtBP1 or CtBP2 as its corepressor. A two-hybrid screen of mouse cDNAs 
with various portions of deltaEF1 identified these proteins, which bind to
deltaEF1 in a manner dependent on the PLDLSL sequence located in the short medial
(MS) portion of deltaEF1. CtBP1 is the mouse orthologue of human CtBP, known as
the C-terminal binding protein of adenovirus E1A, while CtBP2 is the second
homologue. Fusion of mouse CtBP1 or CtBP2 to Gal4DBD (Gal4 DNA binding domain)
made them Gal4 binding site-dependent transcriptional repressors in transfected
10T1/2 cells, indicating their involvement in a transcriptional repression
mechanism. When the MS portion of deltaEF1 was used to Gal4DBD and used to
transfect cells, a strong transrepression activity was generated, but this
activity was totally dependent on the PLDLSL sequence which served as the site
for interaction with endogenous CtBP proteins, indicating that CtBP1 and -2 can
act as corepressors. Exogenous CtBP1/2 significantly enhanced transcriptional
repression by deltaEF1, and this enhancement was lost if the PLDLSL sequence was 
altered, demonstrating that CtBP1 and -2 act as corepressors of deltaEF1. In the 
mouse, CtBP1 is expressed from embryo to adult, but CtBP2 is mainly expressed
during embryogenesis. In developing embryos, CtBP1 and CtBP2 are expressed
broadly with different tissue preferences. Remarkably, their high expression
occurs in subsets of deltaEF1-expressing tissues, e.g., cephalic and dorsal root 
ganglia, spinal cord, posterior-distal halves of the limb bud mesenchyme, and
perichondrium of forming digits, supporting the conclusion that CtBP1 and -2 play
crucial roles in the repressor action of deltaEF1 in these tissues.

PMCID: PMC84984
PMID: 10567582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):7961-71.

Independent repressor domains in ZEB regulate muscle and T-cell differentiation.

Postigo AA(1), Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

ZEB is a zinc finger-homeodomain protein that represses transcription by binding 
to a subset of E-box sequences. ZEB inhibits muscle differentiation in mammalian 
systems, and its Drosophila orthologue, zfh-1, inhibits somatic and cardiac
muscle differentiation during Drosophila embryogenesis. ZEB also binds to the
promoter of pivotal hematopoietic genes (including those encoding interleukin-2, 
CD4, GATA-3, and alpha(4)-integrin), and mice in which ZEB has been genetically
targeted show thymic atrophy, severe defects in lymphocyte differentiation, and
increased expression of the alpha(4)-integrin and CD4. Here, we demonstrate that 
ZEB contains separate repressor domains which function in T lymphocytes and
muscle, respectively. The most C-terminal domain inhibits muscle differentiation 
in mammalian cells by specifically blocking the transcriptional activity of the
myogenic factor MEF2C. The more N-terminal domain blocks activity of
hematopoietic transcription factors such as c-myb, members of the ets family, and
TFE-III. Our results demonstrate that ZEB has evolved with two independent
repressor domains which target distinct sets of transcription factors and
function in different tissues.

PMCID: PMC84881
PMID: 10567522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int Immunol. 1999 Oct;11(10):1701-8.

Negative regulation of CD4 expression in T cells by the transcriptional repressor
ZEB.

Brabletz T(1), Jung A, Hlubek F, Löhberg C, Meiler J, Suchy U, Kirchner T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Krankenhausstrasse
8-10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

ZEB, an E-box binding transcriptional repressor, is an important regulator of T
cell and muscle development. Targeted disruption of ZEB in mice resulted in a
strong reduction of thymocytes and the few T cells that reached the mature stage 
were predominantly CD4(+). CD4 expression during the various stages of T cell
differentiation is controlled at the transcriptional level by a complex array of 
regulatory elements in the CD4 gene locus, consisting of at least three
enhancers, one promoter and one silencer. Here we present evidence that CD4 gene 
expression is negatively regulated by ZEB. We show that ZEB binds to the 5'E-box 
in the CD4-3 element of the proximal CD4 enhancer in competition with the
transcriptional activators E12 and HEB, thereby reducing CD4 expression on CD4
single-positive but not CD4/CD8 double-positive T cells. The conversion of the
CD4 proximal enhancer into a potential silencer element by the transcriptional
repressor ZEB offers an additional concept of CD4 gene regulation in T cells.

PMID: 10508188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. EMBO J. 1999 Sep 15;18(18):5073-84.

New mode of DNA binding of multi-zinc finger transcription factors: deltaEF1
family members bind with two hands to two target sites.

Remacle JE(1), Kraft H, Lerchner W, Wuytens G, Collart C, Verschueren K, Smith
JC, Huylebroeck D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Growth, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology (VIB), Laboratory of Molecular Biology (CELGEN), University of
Leuven, Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

SIP1, a Smad-interacting protein, and deltaEF1, a transcriptional repressor
involved in skeletal and T-cell development, belong to the same family of DNA
binding proteins. SIP1 and deltaEF1 contain two separated clusters of zinc
fingers, one N-terminal and one C-terminal. These clusters show high sequence
homology and are highly conserved between SIP1 and deltaEF1. Each zinc finger
cluster binds independently to a 5'-CACCT sequence. However, high-affinity
binding sites for full-length SIP1 and deltaEF1 in the promoter regions of
candidate target genes like Xenopus Xbra2, and human alpha4-integrin and
E-cadherin, are bipartite elements composed of one CACCT and one CACCTG sequence,
the orientation and spacing of which can vary. Using transgenic Xenopus embryos, 
we demonstrate that the integrity of these two sequences is necessary for correct
spatial expression of a Xbra2 promoter-driven reporter gene. Both zinc finger
clusters must be intact for the high-affinity binding of SIP1 to DNA and for its 
optimal repressor activity. Our results show that SIP1 binds as monomer and
contacts one target sequence with the first zinc finger cluster, and the other
with the second cluster. Our work redefines the optimal binding site and,
consequently, candidate target genes for vertebrate members of the deltaEF1
family.

PMCID: PMC1171578
PMID: 10487759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1999 May;55(2):127-36.

Differentially expressed genes associated with the metastatic phenotype in breast
cancer.

Kirschmann DA(1), Seftor EA, Nieva DR, Mariano EA, Hendrix MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Iowa Cancer Center, College of
Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242-1109, USA.

We have previously shown that human breast carcinoma cells demonstrating an
interconverted phenotype, where keratin (epithelial marker) and vimentin
(mesenchymal marker) intermediate filaments are both expressed, have an increased
ability to invade a basement membrane matrix in vitro. This increase in invasive 
potential has been demonstrated in MDA-MB-231 cells, which constitutively express
keratins and vimentin, and in MCF-7 cells transfected with the mouse vimentin
gene (MoVi). However, vimentin expression alone is not sufficient to confer the
complete metastatic phenotype in MoVi cells, as determined by orthotopic
administration. Thus, in the present study, differential display analysis was
utilized to identify genes that are associated with the invasive and/or
metastatic phenotype of several human breast cancer cell lines. Forty-four of 84 
PCR fragments were differentially expressed as assessed by Northern hybridization
analysis of RNA isolated from MCF-7, MoVi, and MB-231 cell lines. Polyadenylated 
RNA from a panel of poorly invasive, invasive/non-metastatic, and
invasive/metastatic breast carcinoma cell lines was used to differentiate between
cell-specific gene expression and genes associated with the invasive and/or
metastatic phenotype(s). We observed that lysyl oxidase and a zinc finger
transcription factor were expressed only in the invasive and/or metastatic cell
lines; whereas, a thiol-specific antioxidant and a heterochromatin protein were
down-regulated in these cells. In contrast, tissue factor was expressed only in
breast carcinoma cell lines having the highest invasive potential. These results 
suggest that specific genes involved in breast cancer invasion and metastasis can
be separated by differential display methodology to elucidate the molecular basis
of tumor cell progression.

PMID: 10481940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Gen Genet. 1999 Mar;261(2):209-15.

Zinc finger proteins: watchdogs in muscle development.

Krempler A(1), Brenig B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.

The specificity of highly differentiated tissues is largely achieved through the 
action of cell- and stage-restricted transcription factors. The basic events in
skeletal muscle development are triggered by a unique family of myogenic basic
helix-loop-helix proteins - MyoD, Myf-5, myogenin and MRF-4. Binding sites for
these factors are found in the promoter regions of many genes whose expression is
restricted to muscle cells, but the tight regulation of gene expression is
dependent on the interaction of different factors. In this respect zinc finger
proteins seem to play an important role, not only in the establishment of muscle 
cells but also in the maintenance of muscle function. This review discusses
several zinc finger proteins that have been characterized as regulators of muscle
development and muscle-specific gene expression.

PMID: 10102354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;18(1):10-8.

Involvement of negative cofactor NC2 in active repression by zinc
finger-homeodomain transcription factor AREB6.

Ikeda K(1), Halle JP, Stelzer G, Meisterernst M, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Jichi Medical School, Kawachi, Tochigi, Japan.

The transcription factor AREB6 contains a homeodomain flanked by two clusters of 
Krüppel type C2H2 zinc fingers. AREB6 binds to the E-box consensus sequence,
CACCTGT, through either the N- or the C-terminal zinc finger cluster. To gain
insights into the molecular mechanism by which AREB6 activates and represses gene
expression, we analyzed the domain structure of AREB6 in the context of a
heterologous DNA-binding domain by transient-transfection assays. The C-terminal 
region spanning amino acids 1011 to 1124 was identified as a conventional acidic 
activation domain. The region containing amino acids 754 to 901, which was
identified as a repression domain, consists of 40% hydrophobic amino acids
displaying no sequence similarities to other known repression domains. This
region repressed transcription in vitro in a HeLa nuclear extract but not in
reconstituted transcription systems consisting of transcription factor IID
(TFIID), TFIIB, TFIIE, TFIIH/F, and RNA polymerase II. The addition of
recombinant negative cofactor NC2 (NC2alpha/DRAP1 and NC2beta/Dr1) to the
reconstituted transcription system restored the activity of the AREB6 repression 
domain. We further demonstrated interactions between the AREB6 repression domain 
and NC2alpha in yeast two-hybrid assay. Our findings suggest a mechanism of
transcriptional repression that is mediated by the general cofactor NC2.

PMCID: PMC121442
PMID: 9418848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. EMBO J. 1997 Jul 1;16(13):3924-34.

c-Myb and Ets proteins synergize to overcome transcriptional repression by ZEB.

Postigo AA(1), Sheppard AM, Mucenski ML, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cell Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The Zfh family of zinc finger/homeodomain proteins was first identified in
Drosophila where it is required for differentiation of tissues such as the
central nervous system and muscle. ZEB, a vertebrate homolog of Zfh-1, binds a
subset of E boxes and blocks myogenesis through transcriptional repression of
muscle genes. We present evidence here that ZEB also has an important role in
controlling hematopoietic gene transcription. Two families of transcription
factors that are required for normal hematopoiesis are c-Myb and Ets. These
factors act synergistically to activate transcription, and this synergy is
required for transcription of at least several important hematopoietic genes. ZEB
blocks the activity of c-Myb and Ets individually, but together the factors
synergize to resist this repression. Such repression imposes a requirement for
both c-Myb and Ets for transcriptional activity, providing one explanation for
why synergy between these factors is important. The balance between repression by
ZEB and transcriptional activation by c-Myb/Ets provides a flexible regulatory
mechanism for controlling gene expression in hematopoietic cells. We demonstrate 
that one target of this positive/negative regulation in vivo is the alpha4
integrin, which play a key role in normal hematopoiesis and function of mature
leukocytes.

PMCID: PMC1170016
PMID: 9233802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Gene. 1996 Sep 16;173(2):227-32.

Organization of the gene encoding transcriptional repressor deltaEF1 and
cross-species conservation of its domains.

Sekido R(1), Takagi T, Okanami M, Moribe H, Yamamura M, Higashi Y, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan.

DeltaEF1 (delta-crystallin/E2-box factor 1) is a widely distributed repressor of 
transcription which binds at the E2-box sequence, CACCTG. It carries seven zinc
fingers (Zf) in two clusters and a homeodomain in the middle as potential
DNA-binding domains. We cloned the genomic gene encoding chicken deltaEF1 and
analyzed its organization. The gene consisted of nine exons, the N-proximal Zf
were encoded by exons 5 through 7, and the C-proximal Zf by exons 8 and 9. Exon 7
also coded for the large middle portion of the protein including the homeodomain.
Promoter analysis and RNase-protection assay indicated that the gene is driven by
a G+C-rich promoter without a TATA box, and the transcription start points (tsp) 
cluster around 20 bp from the start codon located in exon 1. cDNA and genomic
sequences of the mouse delta EF1 were cloned and compared with the chicken
sequence. The deduced amino acid (aa) sequence was highly conserved between the
chicken and mouse deltaEF1, no only in DNA-binding motifs but also in other
blocks (78% overall aa identity). More recently reported DNA-binding proteins,
AREB6 (human) ZEB (human) and BZP (hamster), were attributed to homologues of
deltaEF1, among which only AREB6 represented full-length sequence. It was also
indicated that rodent deltaEF1 lacked exon 3.

PMID: 8964504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Gene. 1996 Mar 9;169(2):289-90.

Cloning of a cDNA encoding a mouse transcriptional repressor displaying striking 
sequence conservation across vertebrates.

Genetta T(1), Kadesch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center,
Philadelphia 19104, USA. genetta@sunspark.med.upenn.edu

The nucleotide sequence encoding an approx. 120-kDa transcriptional repressor
(MEB1) was determined from a cDNA which was cloned from a mouse brain library. An
alignment of the deduced amino-acid sequences of the putative functional domains 
of MEB1 with those from the human, hamster and chicken homologues reveals a
dramatic degree of conservation.

PMID: 8647466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Oct 1;233(1):73-82.

DNA binding through distinct domains of zinc-finger-homeodomain protein AREB6 has
different effects on gene transcription.

Ikeda K(1), Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

Transcription factor AREB6 has a unique structure composed of two zinc-finger
clusters in N- and C-terminal regions, and one homeodomain in the middle. AREB6
has been known to regulate the expression of the Na, K-ATPase alpha 1 subunit,
interleukin 2 and delta-crystallin genes. We determined the optimal binding sites
for the N-terminal zinc-finger cluster as GTCACCTGT or TGCACCTGT and for the
C-terminal zinc-finger cluster as C/TACCTG/TT by the CASTing method (cyclic
amplification and selection of targets). The additional consensus sequence
GTTTC/G, in conjunction with the CACCTGT sequence, was selected by the second
CASTing for the entire coding region. The N-terminal zinc-finger cluster binds to
DNA strongly when the DNA has GTTTC/G in conjunction with the CACCTGT sequence.
The homeodomain had no specific DNA binding activity but was found to interact
with the N-terminal zinc-finger cluster. Analyses of zinc-finger mutation
proteins revealed that the contribution to DNA binding of each N-terminal
zinc-finger motif is altered depending on the presence of the additional
consensus. Transient transfection assays showed that AREB6 repressed the human
70-kDa heat-shock gene promoter harboring the CACCTGT sequence together with the 
additional consensus, and that AREB6 activated the promoter harboring the CACCTGT
sequence without the additional consensus. These results suggest that AREB6 has
multiple conformational states, leading to positive and negative regulations of
gene transcription.

PMID: 7588776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Sep;14(9):6153-63.

Displacement of an E-box-binding repressor by basic helix-loop-helix proteins:
implications for B-cell specificity of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain enhancer.

Genetta T(1), Ruezinsky D, Kadesch T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19704.

The activity of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) enhancer is restricted to B 
cells, although it binds both B-cell-restricted and ubiquitous transcription
factors. Activation of the enhancer in non-B cells upon overexpression of the
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein E2A appears to be mediated not only by the 
binding of E2A to its cognate E box but also by the resulting displacement of a
repressor from that same site. We have identified a "two-handed" zinc finger
protein, denoted ZEB, the DNA-binding specificity of which mimics that of the
cellular repressor. By employing a derivative E box that binds ZEB but not E2A,
we have shown that the repressor is active in B cells and the IgH enhancer is
silenced in the absence of binding competition by bHLH proteins. Hence, we
propose that a necessary prerequisite of enhancer activity is the B-cell-specific
displacement of a ZEB-like repressor by bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC359142
PMID: 8065348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Apr;3(4):680.

CA repeat polymorphism at the TCF8 locus.

Wardlaw JC(1), Brodie SG, Seddon HL, Williams TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, School of Medicine,
Albuquerque 87131.

PMID: 8069325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Development. 1993 Oct;119(2):433-46.

Delta-crystallin enhancer binding protein delta EF1 is a zinc finger-homeodomain 
protein implicated in postgastrulation embryogenesis.

Funahashi J(1), Sekido R, Murai K, Kamachi Y, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Science, Nagoya University, Japan.

We investigated nuclear factors that bind to delta 1-crystallin enhancer core and
regulate lens-specific transcription. A nuclear factor delta EF1, which binds to 
the essential element of the delta 1-crystallin enhancer core, was molecularly
cloned from the chicken by a southwestern method. The protein organization of
delta EF1 deduced from the cDNA sequence indicated that it has heterogeneous
domains for DNA-binding, two widely separated zinc fingers and a homeodomain,
analogous to Drosophila ZFH-1 protein. The C-terminal zinc fingers were found to 
be responsible for binding to the delta 1-crystallin enhancer core sequence.
delta EF1 had proline-rich and acidic domains common to various transcriptional
activators. During embryogenesis, delta EF1 expression was observed in the
postgastrulation period in mesodermal tissues; initially, in the notochord,
followed by somites, nephrotomes and other components. The expression level
changed dynamically in a tissue, possibly reflecting the differentiation states
of the constituent cells. Besides mesoderm, delta EF1 was expressed in the
nervous system and the lens, but other ectodermal tissues and endoderm remained
very low in delta EF1 expression. Cotransfection experiments indicated that this 
factor acts as a repressor of delta 1-crystallin enhancer. Possession of
heterogeneous DNA-binding domains and its dynamic change of expression in
embryogenesis strongly suggest that delta EF1 acts in multiple ways depending on 
the cell type and the gene under its regulation.

PMID: 7904558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


