
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(7):4180-95. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1415. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Computational modeling identifies key gene regulatory interactions underlying
phenobarbital-mediated tumor promotion.

Luisier R(1), Unterberger EB, Goodman JI, Schwarz M, Moggs J, Terranova R, van
Nimwegen E.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery and Investigative Safety, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, 4057 Basel, Switzerland, Department of Toxicology, Institute of
Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Tübingen,
72074 Tübingen, Germany, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan
State University, MI 48824, USA and Biozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Gene regulatory interactions underlying the early stages of non-genotoxic
carcinogenesis are poorly understood. Here, we have identified key candidate
regulators of phenobarbital (PB)-mediated mouse liver tumorigenesis, a
well-characterized model of non-genotoxic carcinogenesis, by applying a new
computational modeling approach to a comprehensive collection of in vivo gene
expression studies. We have combined our previously developed motif activity
response analysis (MARA), which models gene expression patterns in terms of
computationally predicted transcription factor binding sites with singular value 
decomposition (SVD) of the inferred motif activities, to disentangle the roles
that different transcriptional regulators play in specific biological pathways of
tumor promotion. Furthermore, transgenic mouse models enabled us to identify
which of these regulatory activities was downstream of constitutive androstane
receptor and ß-catenin signaling, both crucial components of PB-mediated liver
tumorigenesis. We propose novel roles for E2F and ZFP161 in PB-mediated
hepatocyte proliferation and suggest that PB-mediated suppression of ESR1
activity contributes to the development of a tumor-prone environment. Our study
shows that combining MARA with SVD allows for automated identification of
independent transcription regulatory programs within a complex in vivo tissue
environment and provides novel mechanistic insights into PB-mediated
hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3985636
PMID: 24464994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Genome Res. 2013 May;23(5):800-11. doi: 10.1101/gr.144899.112. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Systematic dissection of regulatory motifs in 2000 predicted human enhancers
using a massively parallel reporter assay.

Kheradpour P(1), Ernst J, Melnikov A, Rogov P, Wang L, Zhang X, Alston J,
Mikkelsen TS, Kellis M.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Genome-wide chromatin annotations have permitted the mapping of putative
regulatory elements across multiple human cell types. However, their experimental
dissection by directed regulatory motif disruption has remained unfeasible at the
genome scale. Here, we use a massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA) to measure 
the transcriptional levels induced by 145-bp DNA segments centered on
evolutionarily conserved regulatory motif instances within enhancer chromatin
states. We select five predicted activators (HNF1, HNF4, FOXA, GATA, NFE2L2) and 
two predicted repressors (GFI1, ZFP161) and measure reporter expression in
erythroleukemia (K562) and liver carcinoma (HepG2) cell lines. We test 2104
wild-type sequences and 3314 engineered enhancer variants containing targeted
motif disruptions, each using 10 barcode tags and two replicates. The resulting
data strongly confirm the enhancer activity and cell-type specificity of enhancer
chromatin states, the ability of 145-bp segments to recapitulate both, the
necessary role of regulatory motifs in enhancer function, and the complementary
roles of activator and repressor motifs. We find statistically robust evidence
that (1) disrupting the predicted activator motifs abolishes enhancer function,
while silent or motif-improving changes maintain enhancer activity; (2)
evolutionary conservation, nucleosome exclusion, binding of other factors, and
strength of the motif match are predictive of enhancer activity; (3) scrambling
repressor motifs leads to aberrant reporter expression in cell lines where the
enhancers are usually inactive. Our results suggest a general strategy for
deciphering cis-regulatory elements by systematic large-scale manipulation and
provide quantitative enhancer activity measurements across thousands of
constructs that can be mined to develop predictive models of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3638136
PMID: 23512712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. BMC Syst Biol. 2011 May 9;5:67. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-5-67.

A modulated empirical Bayes model for identifying topological and temporal
estrogen receptor a regulatory networks in breast cancer.

Shen C(1), Huang Y, Liu Y, Wang G, Zhao Y, Wang Z, Teng M, Wang Y, Flockhart DA, 
Skaar TC, Yan P, Nephew KP, Huang TH, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Estrogens regulate diverse physiological processes in various tissues
through genomic and non-genomic mechanisms that result in activation or
repression of gene expression. Transcription regulation upon estrogen stimulation
is a critical biological process underlying the onset and progress of the
majority of breast cancer. Dynamic gene expression changes have been shown to
characterize the breast cancer cell response to estrogens, the every molecular
mechanism of which is still not well understood.
RESULTS: We developed a modulated empirical Bayes model, and constructed a novel 
topological and temporal transcription factor (TF) regulatory network in MCF7
breast cancer cell line upon stimulation by 17ß-estradiol stimulation. In the
network, significant TF genomic hubs were identified including ER-alpha and AP-1;
significant non-genomic hubs include ZFP161, TFDP1, NRF1, TFAP2A, EGR1, E2F1, and
PITX2. Although the early and late networks were distinct (<5% overlap of ERa
target genes between the 4 and 24 h time points), all nine hubs were
significantly represented in both networks. In MCF7 cells with acquired
resistance to tamoxifen, the ERa regulatory network was unresponsive to
17ß-estradiol stimulation. The significant loss of hormone responsiveness was
associated with marked epigenomic changes, including hyper- or hypo-methylation
of promoter CpG islands and repressive histone methylations.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a number of estrogen regulated target genes and
established estrogen-regulated network that distinguishes the genomic and
non-genomic actions of estrogen receptor. Many gene targets of this network were 
not active anymore in anti-estrogen resistant cell lines, possibly because their 
DNA methylation and histone acetylation patterns have changed.

PMCID: PMC3117732
PMID: 21554733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mamm Genome. 2010 Aug;21(7-8):337-49. doi: 10.1007/s00335-010-9274-6. Epub 2010
Aug 11.

Mouse chromosome 17 candidate modifier genes for thrombosis.

Sa Q(1), Hart E, Nadeau JH, Hoover-Plow JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cardiovascular Medicine and Molecular Cardiology, Joseph J.
Jacobs Center for Thrombosis and Vascular Biology, Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, OH, 44195, USA.

Two overlapping quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for clot stability, Hmtb8 and
Hmtb9, were identified on mouse chromosome 17 in an F2 intercross derived from
C57BL/6J (B6) and B6-Chr17(A/J) (B6-Chr17) mouse strains. The intervals were in
synteny with a QTL for thrombotic susceptibility on chromosome 18 in a human
study, and there were 23 homologs between mouse and human. The objective of this 
study was to determine whether any of these genes in the syntenic region are
likely candidates as modifiers for clot stability. Seven genes, Twsg1, Zfp161,
Dlgap1, Ralbp1, Myom1, Rab31, and Emilin2, of the 23 genes with single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the mRNA-UTR had differential expression in B6 and A/J
mice. Dlgap1, Ralbp1, Myom1, and Emilin2 also had nonsynonymous SNPs. In
addition, two other genes had nonsynonymous SNPs, Lama1 and Ndc80. Of these nine 
candidate genes, Emilin2 was selected for further analysis since other EMILIN
(Elastin Microfibril Interface Located Protein) proteins have known functions in 
vascular structure and coagulation. Differences were found between B6 and A/J
mice in vessel wall architecture and EMILIN2 protein in plasma, carotid vessel
wall, and thrombi formed after ferric chloride injury. In B6-Chr17(A/J) mice both
clot stability and Emilin2 mRNA expression were higher compared to those in B6
and A/J mice, suggesting the exposure of epistatic interactions. Although other
homologous genes in the QTL region cannot be ruled out as causative genes,
further investigation of Emilin2 as a candidate gene for thrombosis
susceptibility is warranted.

PMCID: PMC2923722
PMID: 20700597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Cancer. 2010 Aug 10;9:213. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-213.

Loss, mutation and deregulation of L3MBTL4 in breast cancers.

Addou-Klouche L(1), Adélaïde J, Finetti P, Cervera N, Ferrari A, Bekhouche I,
Sircoulomb F, Sotiriou C, Viens P, Moulessehoul S, Bertucci F, Birnbaum D,
Chaffanet M.

Author information: 
(1)Marseille Cancer Research Center, Department of Molecular Oncology, UMR891
Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Many alterations are involved in mammary oncogenesis, including
amplifications of oncogenes and losses of tumor suppressor genes (TSG). Losses
may affect almost all chromosome arms and many TSGs remain to be identified.
RESULTS: We studied 307 primary breast tumors and 47 breast cancer cell lines by 
high resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). We identified a
region on 18p11.31 lost in about 20% of the tumors and 40% of the cell lines. The
minimal common region of loss (Chr18:6,366,938-6,375,929 bp) targeted the L3MBTL4
gene. This gene was also targeted by breakage in one tumor and in two cell lines.
We studied the exon sequence of L3MBTL4 in 180 primary tumor samples and 47 cell 
lines and found six missense and one nonsense heterozygous mutations. Compared
with normal breast tissue, L3MBTL4 mRNA expression was downregulated in 73% of
the tumors notably in luminal, ERBB2 and normal-like subtypes. Losses of the
18p11 region were associated with low L3MBTL4 expression level. Integrated
analysis combining genome and gene expression profiles of the same tumors pointed
to 14 other potential 18p TSG candidates. Downregulated expression of ZFP161,
PPP4R1 and YES1 was correlated with luminal B molecular subtype. Low ZFP161 gene 
expression was associated with adverse clinical outcome.
CONCLUSION: We have identified L3MBTL4 as a potential TSG of chromosome arm 18p. 
The gene is targeted by deletion, breakage and mutations and its mRNA is
downregulated in breast tumors. Additional 18p TSG candidates might explain the
aggressive phenotype associated with the loss of 18p in breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC2933619
PMID: 20698951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Tsitologiia. 2009;51(12):1005-12.

[The role of ZF5 and CGGBP-20 transcription factors in expression regulation of
human FMR1 gene responsible for X-fragile syndrome].

[Article in Russian]

Gulyi PV, Orlov SV, Dizhe EB, Kuteikin-Tepliakov KB, Ignatovich IA, Zhuk SV,
Perevozchikov AP.

The human FMR1 gene encodes an RNA-binding protein taking part in translation
regulation. The 5'-untranslated region of FMR1 gene contains a large number of
tandem repeats of GCC triplets (5-50) which increasing (more then 200) is
responsible for X-fragile syndrome (human congenital anomaly). As it has been
shown earlier, al least two transcription factors (ZF5 and CGGBP-20) are capable 
of interacting specifically with GCC-repeats in regulatory regions of some genes.
In this work, their roles in FMR1 gene expression regulation were studied. It was
demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay that ZF5 recombinant protein
specifically bound with GCC-triplet repeats (GCC9). Tissue-specific distributions
of ZF5 and FMR1 proteins are very overlapped in mammalian. Inhibition of ZF5
expression in HepG2 cells (by RNA interference) leads to at least 1.5 times
stimulations of FMR1 gene expression in these cells. To estimate the contribution
of GCC-triplet repeats in FMR1 gene expression regulation we used two alternative
variants of genetic construction: containing luciferase reporter gene under
5'-regulatory region fragment devoid of GCC-triplet repeats or including the GCC9
nucleotide sequence. HepG2 cells were co-transfected by these constructions and
expressions vectors of ZF5 or (and) CGGBP-20 respectively. It was found that ZF5 
downregulated the activity of 5'-regulatory region of FMR1 gene in both cases
(acting probably through canonic 5'-GCGCGC3' sites). The presence of GCC-triplet 
repeats in the construction weakens this ZF5 effect. CGGBP-20 downregulates the
activity of 5'-region of FMR1 gene in the presence of GCC-triplets only. The data
obtained evidently indicate differently directed ZF5 effects on FMR1 gene
expression and suggest the mechanism to explain the earlier demonstrated
phenomenon about increasing of mRNA level in permutation FMR1 allele carries.

PMID: 20141036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. DNA Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;27(11):589-600. doi: 10.1089/dna.2008.0766.

Regulation of the mouse Treacher Collins syndrome homolog (Tcof1) promoter
through differential repression of constitutive expression.

Shows KH(1), Shiang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298-0033, USA. khshows@vcu.edu

Treacher Collins syndrome is an autosomal-dominant mandibulofacial dysostosis
caused by haploinsufficiency of the TCOF1 gene product treacle. Mouse Tcof1
protein is approximately 61% identical and 71% similar to treacle, and
heterozygous knockout of Tcof1 causes craniofacial malformation. Tcof1 expression
is high in developing neural crest, but much lower in other tissues. To
investigate this dual regulation, highly conserved regions upstream of TCOF1
homologs were tested through deletion and mutation reporter assays, and conserved
predicted transcription factor binding sites were assessed through chromatin
binding studies. Assays were performed in mouse P19 embryonic carcinoma cells and
in HEK293 cells to determine differential activation in cell types at different
stages of differentiation. Binding of Cebpb, Zfp161, and Sp1 transcription
factors was specific to the Tcof1 regulatory region in P19 cells. The Zfp161
binding site demonstrated P19 cell-specific repression, while the Sp1/Sp3
candidate site demonstrated HEK293 cell-specific activation. Moreover, presence
of c-myb and Zfp161 transcripts was specific to P19 cells. A minimal promoter
fragment from -253 to +43 bp directs constitutive expression in both cell types, 
and dual regulation of Tcof1 appears to be through differential repression of
this minimal promoter. The CpG island at the transcription start site remains
unmethylated in P19 cells, 11.5 dpc mouse embryonic tissue, and adult mouse ear, 
which supports constitutive activation of the Tcof1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2925028
PMID: 18771418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FEBS J. 2007 Sep;274(18):4848-62. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

Novel repressor of the human FMR1 gene - identification of p56 human
(GCC)(n)-binding protein as a Krüppel-like transcription factor ZF5.

Orlov SV(1), Kuteykin-Teplyakov KB, Ignatovich IA, Dizhe EB, Mirgorodskaya OA,
Grishin AV, Guzhova OB, Prokhortchouk EB, Guliy PV, Perevozchikov AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Russian
Academy of Medical Sciences, St Petersburg, Russia. serge@iem.sp.ru

A series of relatively short (GCC)(n) triplet repeats (n = 3-30) located within
regulatory regions of many mammalian genes may be considered as putative
cis-acting transcriptional elements (GCC-elements). Fragile X-mental retardation 
syndrome is caused by an expansion of (GCC)(n) triplet repeats within the
5'-untranslated region of the human fragile X-mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene.
The present study aimed to characterize a novel human (GCC)(n)-binding protein
and investigate its possible role in the regulation of the FMR1 gene. A novel
human (GCC)(n)-binding protein, p56, was isolated and identified as a
Krüppel-like transcription factor, ZF5, by MALDI-TOF analysis. The capacity of
ZF5 to specifically interact with (GCC)(n) triplet repeats was confirmed by the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay with purified recombinant ZF5 protein. In
cotransfection experiments, ZF5 overexpression repressed activity of the
GCC-element containing mouse ribosomal protein L32 gene promoter. Moreover, RNA
interference assay results showed that endogenous ZF5 acts as a repressor of the 
human FMR1 gene. Thus, these data identify a new class of ZF5 targets, a subset
of genes containing GCC-elements in their regulatory regions, and raise the
question of whether transcription factor ZF5 is implicated in the pathogenesis of
fragile X syndrome.

PMID: 17714511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Tsitologiia. 2006;48(3):246-52.

[Transcription factor ZF5 regulates expression of mammalian gene containing
GCC-triplet repeats in 5'-regulatory region in human hepatoma HepG2 cells].

[Article in Russian]

Orlov SV, Kuteikin-Tepliakov KB, Grishin AV, Dizhe EB, Prokhorchuk EB,
Perevozchikov AP.

Some nuclear proteins of human HeLa and HepG2 cells are capable of binding to
GCC-triplet repeats--(GCC)n > 3 in 5'-regulatory regions of a number of mammalian
genes--G-C-elements. According to our previous data, nucleotide sequence (GCC)4
in promoter of mouse ribosomal protein L32 gene (rpL32) between 17 and 6 bp
upstream of transcription start site interacts to nuclear proteins from HepG2
cells, and may be considered as a GCC-element. We suggest that one of those
proteins, with molecular weight about 52 kDa, which may interact with rpL32
GCC-element, is a known conservative mammalian transcription factor ZF5.
DNA-binding domain of ZF5 contains a few Kruppel-like Zn-fingers (Cys2His2-type) 
interacting with the GC-rich nucleotide sequences in 5'-regulatory regions of a
number of mammalian genes. Our results (obtained by EMSA) showed that recombinant
GST-ZF5 fused protein containing ZF5 DNA-binding domain specifically binds a few 
GS-rich sequences: (GCC)g-9riplet repeats, 5'-GCGCGC-3' (known ZF5 consensus
binding site) and (more preferable) the fragment (-24...+1 bp) of rpL32 promoter.
The high affinity of ZF5 DNA-domain binding with the latter may be explained by
the presence in this fragment of two overlapped subsequences, each being capable 
of binding to ZF5: (GCC)4 and 5'-GCGCGC- 3'. Zf5 cDNA was cloned from HepG2 cells
by RT-PCR method, and then used for construction of the gene expression vector.
It has been shown that Zf5 cDNA expression vector specifically down-regulates (in
luciferase assays) the activity of rpL32 promoter (-155...+159) including the
above mentioned GC-rich subsequences by cotransfection of HepG2 cells. Therefore,
our results enable us to consider GCC-elements as a novel class of ZF5 targets in
5'-regulatory regions of mammalian genes.

PMID: 16805315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proteomics. 2005 Jul;5(11):2819-38.

Proteomics profiling of nuclear proteins for kidney fibroblasts suggests hypoxia,
meiosis, and cancer may meet in the nucleus.

Shakib K(1), Norman JT, Fine LG, Brown LR, Godovac-Zimmermann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rayne Institute, University College London, London,
UK.

Proteomics methods were used to characterize proteins that change their form or
abundance in the nucleus of NRK49F rat kidney fibroblasts during prolonged
hypoxia (1% O(2), 12 h). Of the 791 proteins that were monitored, about 20%
showed detectable changes. The 51 most abundant proteins were identified by mass 
spectrometry. Changes in nuclear receptor transcription factors (THRalpha1,
RORalpha4, HNF4alpha, NUR77), other transcription factors (GATA1, AP-2alpha,
OCT1, ATF6alpha, ZFP161, ZNF354A, PDCD2), and transcription cofactors (PC4, PCAF,
MTA1, TCEA1, JMY) are indicative of major, co-ordinated changes in transcription.
Proteins involved in DNA repair/recombination, ribosomal RNA synthesis, RNA
processing, nuclear transport, nuclear organization, protein translation,
glycolysis, lipid metabolism, several protein kinases (PKCdelta, MAP3K4, GRK3),
as well as proteins with no established functional role were also observed. The
observed proteins suggest nuclear regulatory roles for proteins involved in
cytosolic processes such as glycolysis and fatty acid metabolism, and roles in
overall nuclear structure/organization for proteins previously associated with
meiosis and/or spermatogenesis (synaptonemal complex proteins 1 and 2 (SYCP1,
SYCP2), meiosis-specific nuclear structural protein 1 (MNS1), LMNC2, zinc finger 
protein 99 (ZFP99)). Proteins associated with cytoplasmic membrane functions
(ACTN4, hyaluronan mediated motility receptor (RHAMM), VLDLR, GRK3) and/or
endocytosis (DNM2) were also seen. For 30% of the identified proteins, new
isoforms indicative of alternative transcription were detected (e.g., GATA1,
ATF6alpha, MTA1, MLH1, MYO1C, UBF, SYCP2, EIF3S10, MAP3K4, ZFP99). Comparison
with proteins involved in cell death, cancer, and testis/meiosis/spermatogenesis 
suggests commonalities, which may reflect fundamental mechanisms for
down-regulation of cellular function.

PMID: 15942958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Vis. 2005 Feb 2;11:97-110.

Genomic structure and organization of the high grade Myopia-2 locus (MYP2)
critical region: mutation screening of 9 positional candidate genes.

Scavello GS Jr(1), Paluru PC, Zhou J, White PS, Rappaport EF, Young TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Ophthalmology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

PURPOSE: Myopia is a common complex eye disorder, with implications for blindness
due to increased risk of retinal detachment, chorioretinal degeneration,
premature cataracts, and glaucoma. A genomic interval of 2.2 centiMorgans (cM)
was defined on chromosome band 18p11.31 using 7 families diagnosed with autosomal
dominant high myopia and was designated the MYP2 locus. To characterize this
region, we analyzed 9 known candidate genes localized to within the 2.2 cM
interval by direct sequencing.
METHODS: Using public databases, a physical map of the MYP2 interval was
compiled. Gene expression studies in ocular tissues using complementary DNA
library screens, microarray experiments, reverse transcription techniques, and
expression data identified in external databases aided in prioritizing gene
selection for screening. Coding regions, intron-exon boundaries and untranslated 
exons of all known genes [Clusterin-like 1 (CLUL1), elastin microfibril
interfacer 2 (EMILIN2), lipin 2 (LPIN2), myomesin 1 (MYOM1), myosin regulatory
light chain 3 (MRCL3), myosin regulatory light chain 2 (MRLC2), transforming
growth beta-induced factor (TGIFbeta), large Drosophila homolog associated
protein 1 (DLGAP1), and zinc finger protein 161 homolog (ZFP161)] were sequenced 
using genomic DNA samples from 9 affected and 6 unaffected MYP2 pedigree members,
and from 5 external controls (4 unaffected and 1 affected). Gene sequence changes
were compared to known variants from public single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
databases.
RESULTS: In total, 103 polymorphisms were found by direct sequencing; 10 were
missense, 14 were silent, 26 were not translated, 49 were intronic, 1 insertion, 
and 3 were homozygous deletions. Twenty-seven polymorphisms were novel. Novel
SNPs were submitted to the public database; observed frequencies were submitted
for known SNPs. No sequence alterations segregated with the disease phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutation analysis of 9 encoded positional candidate genes on MYP2
loci did not identify sequence alterations associated with the disease phenotype.
Further studies of MYP2 candidate genes, including analysis of putative genes
predicted in silico, are underway.

PMID: 15723005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Yi Chuan. 2004 Mar;26(2):155-9.

[Variations of the zinc finger protein 161 gene in Chinese with or without high
myopia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang GB(1), Zhang QJ, Xiao XS, Li JZ, Zhang FS, Li SQ, Li W, Li T, Jia XY, Guo L,
Guo XM.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Genetics and Molecular Biology, National Ophthalmological Labs and
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, ZhongShan University, Guangzhou 510060, China.
rogasan@163.net

To investigate the association between variations of ZFP161 gene and high myopia,
A total of 204 probands with simple high myopia(< or = -6.0 dipoters) were
collected while 116 normal persons from different families without high myopia or
related disease were used as controls. Genomic DNA was prepared from the
peripheral leucocytes. The coding sequences of ZFP161 gene in 320 subjects were
analyzed by using exon-by-exon PCR-heteroduplex-SSCP analysis. Identification of 
the Variations by cloning and sequencing, combinated with controls and family
analysis, was used to disclose the correlation between ZFP161 gene and high
myopia. A mutation of ZFP161 gene was identified as an insertion of AT before the
58th nucleotide of intron 1 (IVS1 58-59)(1/204) and a variation of ZFP161 gene
was identified as a heterozygous C to A of the 168th nucleotide in exon 2
(Codon56, GCC-->GCA, Ala56Ala). Ala56Ala is a non-sense mutation identified in 5 
of the 204 patients and 3 of 116 controls. No evidence shows that these
variations are responsible for high myopia.

PMID: 15639979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Feb 11;327(2):615-27.

Novel human BTB/POZ domain-containing zinc finger protein ZNF295 is directly
associated with ZFP161.

Wang J(1), Kudoh J, Takayanagi A, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Human ZNF295 protein harbors a BTB/POZ domain and multiple krüppel (C(2)H(2))
type zinc finger domains, and thus belongs to a family of POK (POZ and krüppel)
transcription factor. We have identified many transcript variants generated by
the alternative splicing in 5' non-coding exons, an intra-exonic splicing in a
coding region, and the use of three polyadenylation signals in the 3' UTR. The
intra-exonic splicing removes 603-bp coding sequence, and thus ZNF295 gene
produces two protein isoforms: ZNF295L with 1066 amino acid residues and ZNF295S 
with 865 amino acid residues, containing 9 and 5 zinc finger domains,
respectively. ZNF295 is ubiquitously expressed in human fetal and adult tissues. 
Analysis of transcription activity of ZNF295 using various promoter-reporters
demonstrated that ZNF295 acts as a transcription repressor, and contains two
separate regions for repression activity: the BTB/POZ domain and the central
region between BTB/POZ and ZF domains. Both ZNF295L and ZNF295S could interact
not only with themselves and each other, but also with another POK protein ZFP161
known to function as a transcription repressor and an activator. We postulated
that ZNF295 may be involved in the bi-directional control of gene expression in
concert with ZFP161.

PMID: 15629158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. DNA Seq. 2004 Aug;15(4):310-3.

Cloning and characterization of zinc finger protein 161 in Rattus norvegicus.

Lee KH(1), Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, 17
Haengdang-dong, Seongdong-Gu, Seoul 133-791, South Korea.

Zinc finger protein 161 (ZFP161) belongs to the large Kruppel type ZFP family,
contains five consecutive zinc fingers, and may be involved in development. Here,
we present the novel cloning and characterization of the ZFP161 cDNA from Rattus 
norvegicus. The rat ZFP161 has an open reading frame of 1347 bp and encodes a ZFP
of 449 amino acids with a predicted mass of 51 kDa. Sequence alignment shows that
there is a high homology among the deduced amino acid sequences of the rat, mouse
and human ZFP161 proteins. We determined that both the mouse and rat coding
sequences are contained within a single exon, with the start codon (ATG)
contained in a separate exon. RT-PCR revealed that the ZFP161 mRNA is expressed
at high levels in rat spleen, brain, lung and kidney, and at much lower levels in
muscle and heart.

PMID: 15620221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 23;313(4):969-76.

Human zinc finger protein 161, a novel transcriptional activator of the dopamine 
transporter.

Lee KH(1), Kwak YD, Kim DH, Chang MY, Lee YS, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea

The dopamine transporter (DAT) terminates dopaminergic neurotransmission via
reuptake of released dopamine into presynaptic neurons. We have cloned 2.5 kb of 
the regulatory region upstream of human DAT (hDAT) and constructed a series of
deletion mutants to test promoter activity. A comparison of promoter activity
between non-neural and neuronal cell lines reveals an interesting difference in
pattern. In the PC12 cell line, activity of the proximal promoter is strongly
silenced by one or more unidentified elements spanning positions -395 to -2465 of
the hDAT gene. Our studies focus on identifying and characterizing the activating
factor for hDAT transcription in the sequence between -2511 and -2492 (5(')-CTA
CCT GCA CAG TTC ACG GA-3('), termed HY1). In this investigation, we cloned the
zinc finger protein 161 (ZFP161) gene as a HY1-binding factor, using the yeast
one-hybrid screen. Recombinant ZFP161 was produced to evaluate the DNA-binding
properties of the protein. The ability of ZFP161 to directly bind HY1 was
examined in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. RT-PCR analyses revealed
that transfection of ZFP161 induced hDAT mRNA expression in HEK293 cells. We
additionally confirmed the expression and localization of the DAT protein, using 
a specific antibody. Both the HY1 sequence and the downstream region were
necessary for activation of the hDAT promoter by ZFP161. This finding suggests
that the site of cofactor interaction with ZFP161 may exist downstream of HY1.

PMID: 14706637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Autoimmun. 2000 Aug;15(1):75-80.

Identification of human autoantibodies to the transcriptional repressor ZF5.

Yanagidani A(1), Matsuoka M, Yokoro K, Tanaka H, Numoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology
and Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima, Minami-ku, 734,
Japan.

ZF5 was originally cloned as a transcriptional repressor on the mouse c-myc
promoter. It contains the Kruppel-type zinc fingers and a conserved POZ domain,
which is found in a growing number of zinc finger proteins and mediate
protein-protein interactions. Autoantibodies against transcription factors are
sometimes found in sera from patients with high levels of anti-nuclear antibody
(ANA). Using Western blotting with ZF5 and sera of autoimmune disease, we
detected one serum, named M6 serum, which contains the antibody against a
transcriptional repressor ZF5. The confirmed epitope was specific to ZF5 and was 
not reactive to the other analogous factors: BCL-6, ZID, and Sp1. This epitope
also has a molecular mimicry of the viral proteins. From these results, we
predict that viral protein which mimics host ZF5 antigen triggers self-reactive T
cell clones and induces the autoantibody in M6 serum after the destruction of
host tissues.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10936031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 24;256(3):573-8.

ZF5, which is a Kruppel-type transcriptional repressor, requires the zinc finger 
domain for self-association.

Numoto M(1), Yokoro K, Koshi J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University,
1-2-3 Kasumi, Hiroshima, Minami-ku, 734, Japan. mnumoto@ipc.hiroshima-u.ac.jp

ZF5, which we have cloned as a transcriptional repressor on the mouse c-myc
promoter, has the POZ domain at the amino-terminus and the Kruppel-type zinc
finger domain at the carboxy-terminus. In this report, we showed that ZF5 has two
contradictory functions in transcription: activation of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) promoter and repression of the HSV thymidine kinase (TK) promoter.
The POZ domain contributed to the repressor activity, whereas the active function
resulted from the DNA-binding ability of the zinc finger domain. We demonstrated 
that the POZ domain has a function mediating homomeric protein-protein
interaction and this interaction requires the zinc finger domain. Furthermore,
the POZ domain decreased the DNA-binding activity of the zinc finger domain.
These results can provide evidence indicating the important interaction between
the POZ and zinc finger domains.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10080939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Feb 16;255(2):528-34.

Analysis of the consensus binding sequence and the DNA-binding domain of ZF5.

Obata T(1), Yanagidani A, Yokoro K, Numoto M, Yamamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Japan.
tobata@ipc.hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Murine ZF5 is a transcription factor with five zinc finger motifs that represses 
the c-myc gene by binding to two GC-rich elements at the promoter region. Because
of its ubiquitous expression in a variety of tissues, elucidation of biological
functions and cellular target genes of ZF5 is of great interest. As the first
step of identifying cellular target genes, we have attempted to determine the
consensus binding motif for ZF5. We succeeded in isolating 19 oligonucleotide
duplex DNAs to which ZF5 binds and determined the binding sequences with DNase I 
footprinting analysis. From these sequences, we deduced the consensus binding
motif for ZF5 to be GSGCGCGR. In addition, we have analyzed the DNA-binding
domain of ZF5 by testing a series of deletion mutants. It turned out that the
zinc fingers 3 and 4 of the five finger motifs play a critical role in DNA
binding.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10049742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 May 29;246(3):668-74.

Genomic cloning and characterization of the mouse POZ/zinc-finger protein ZF5.

Yokoro K(1), Yanagidani A, Obata T, Yamamoto S, Numoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Japan.

We isolated genomic DNA containing the entire sequence of ZF5, which was
originally identified by its ability to repress the mouse c-myc promoter and
which was characterized as one of the POZ (Poxvirus and zinc finger) proteins.
The POZ motif is a protein-protein interaction interface found at the N-terminal 
region of zinc finger proteins. Sequence analysis demonstrated that the ATG
translation initiation codon was separately located from the remainder of the
coding sequence. Using both RNase protection and primer extension assay, a single
major transcription start site was determined. Promoter analysis by transient
transfection assay suggested positive autoregulation by ZF5 itself. The ZF5
N-terminal region, including the POZ domain, was required for this regulation.
Sp1 also activated the ZF5 promoter and this activity was repressed by addition
of ZF5. ZF5 expression was stronger in mouse ovary, lung and brain than in other 
organs.

PMID: 9618270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Genomics. 1997 Jul 15;43(2):156-64.

The human gene ZFP161 on 18p11.21-pter encodes a putative c-myc repressor and is 
homologous to murine Zfp161 (Chr 17) and Zfp161-rs1 (X Chr)

Sobek-Klocke I(1), Disqué-Kochem C, Ronsiek M, Klocke R, Jockusch H, Breuning A, 
Ponstingl H, Rojas K, Overhauser J, Eichenlaub-Ritter U.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Genetechnology/Microbiology Unit, University of Bielefeld,
Germany.

Erratum in
    Genomics 1997 Nov 1;45(3):633.

A clone from a lambda gt11 cDNA expression library of HeLa cells was isolated,
sequenced, and shown to encode a new human zinc finger protein. The cDNA of the
gene termed ZFP161 has an open reading frame of 1347 bp. The predicted protein
comprises 449 amino acid residues and contains five zinc finger motifs of the
Krüppel type near the C-terminus and a BTB/POZ domain in the N-terminal region.
The protein is 98% homologous to a murine zinc finger protein, ZF5 (M. Numoto et 
al., 1993, Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 3767-3775), which is a putative transcriptional
repressor of c-myc and exhibits growth-suppressive activity in mouse cell lines. 
Through the use of a panel of somatic cell hybrids for chromosomal assignment and
DNAs of somatic cell hybrids containing a deleted chromosome 18 for fine mapping,
the human gene ZFP161 was localized to 18p11.21-pter. Therefore, ZFP161 is a
candidate gene by position for the holoprosencephaly type 4 gene, HPE4, which is 
involved in congenital malformations. With DNAs from an interspecific backcross, 
two homologous mouse genes, Zfp161 and Zfp161-rs1, were mapped to chromosome 17
and the X chromosome, respectively. Mapping of Zfp161 confirms and extends a
region of homology between distal mouse chromosome 17 and human 18p.

PMID: 9244432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jul 9;236(1):20-5.

Detection of mouse skeletal muscle-specific product, which includes ZF5 zinc
fingers and a VP16 acidic domain, by reverse transcriptase PCR.

Numoto M(1), Yokoro K, Yasuda S, Yanagihara K, Niwa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology
and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Minami-ku, Japan.
mnumoto@ipc.hiroshima-u.ac.jp

ZF5, which we have cloned as a repressor on the mouse c-myc promoter, is a zinc
finger protein containing Kruppel-type zinc finger and ZiN/POZ domains. In a
reverse transcriptase PCR assay using mouse skeletal muscle RNA, we identified a 
827 bp PCR product including the zinc finger domain of ZF5 and the acidic domain 
of VP16. The presence of the VP16 acidic domain induced the reduction of
DNA-binding activity of the zinc finger domain. In addition, the inhibitory
effect of the VP16 acidic domain was demonstrated on the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) promoter, but there was no effect on the thymidine kinase (TK)
promoter.

PMID: 9223418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 May 2;1352(1):23-6.

Expression cloning and intracellular localization of a human ZF5 homologue.

Sugiura K(1), Muro Y, Nagai Y, Kamimoto T, Wakabayashi T, Ohashi M, Hagiwara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Showa-ku, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA encoding a human homologue of ZF5 (hZF5), which has five
Kruppel-like C2H2 type zinc fingers at carboxyl terminus and the BTB/POZ
(poxvirus and zinc finger) at the amino terminus, using autoimmune sera from a
patient with overlap syndrome (dermatomyositis and scleroderma). Sequencing of
the entire cDNA revealed an open reading frame (ORF) of 1349 bp with a deduced
protein sequence of 449 amino acid residues and a calculated molecular weight of 
51.3 kDa. The deduced amino acid sequence of hZF5 is highly homologous to mouse
ZF5 (99.3% identity). Immunofluorescence studies revealed that HA-tagged hZF5
transiently expressed in COS-7 cells showed the nuclear dot pattern in the
BTB/POZ domain-dependent manner.

PMID: 9177479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Mar 15;25(6):1108-16.

The ZiN/POZ domain of ZF5 is required for both transcriptional activation and
repression.

Kaplan J(1), Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

ZF5 is a ubiquitously expressed protein originally identified by its ability to
bind and repress the murine c-myc promoter. It contains five C-terminal zinc
fingers and a conserved N-terminal ZiN/POZ domain. This motif, found in a growing
number of zinc finger proteins, can inhibit DNA binding and mediate dimerization 
[Bardwell, V.J. and Treisman,R. (1994) Genes Dev., 8,1664-1677]. In the current
study, a cyclic amplification and selection of targets (CAST) protocol detected
preferred ZF5 binding sites which are highly GC-rich. Binding to these sites by
ZF5 depended upon the zinc fingers and was enhanced when the ZiN/POZ domain was
removed. Using transient cotransfection assays, ZF5 was shown to activate the
HIV-1 LTR and repress the beta-actin promoter. The ZiN/POZ domain was shown to
mediate ZF5-dependent transcriptional activation and repression. From these data,
we conclude that ZF5 can both activate and repress in the context of different
natural promoters and that its ZiN/POZ domain can affect two functions; DNA
binding and transcriptional modulation.

PMCID: PMC146578
PMID: 9092617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1995 Mar;86(3):277-83.

Over-expressed ZF5 gene product, a c-myc-binding protein related to GL1-Kruppel
protein, has a growth-suppressive activity in mouse cell lines.

Numoto M(1), Yokoro K, Yanagihara K, Kamiya K, Niwa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University.

ZF5 encodes a zinc finger protein, which contains five C2H2-type zinc fingers
showing homology with the zinc finger of the Kruppel family, and binds to two
sites in the mouse c-myc promoter. We report the effect of over-expression of ZF5
on cell growth. ZnCl2 treatment suppressed the growth of a mouse fibroblast cell 
line (L cells) transfected with the wild-type ZF5 gene driven by the
metallothionein promoter. Cells transfected with the wild-type ZF5 gene formed
colonies two- to fivefold less efficiently than those transfected with the mutant
ZF5 gene in P19, NIH3T3, 3T3-L1 and L cells. Over-expression of ZF5 did not cause
c-myc down-regulation or arrest of the cell cycle, but increased the DNA content.

PMID: 7744698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 11;21(16):3767-75.

Transcriptional repressor ZF5 identifies a new conserved domain in zinc finger
proteins.

Numoto M(1), Niwa O, Kaplan J, Wong KK, Merrell K, Kamiya K, Yanagihara K, Calame
K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Nuclear Medicine and Biology, Hiroshima University,
Japan.

We have cloned a cDNA encoding a new murine C2H2 zinc finger protein, ZF5. The
51.3 kD protein contains five GL1-Kruppel type zinc fingers at the C-terminus. At
its N-terminus, ZF5 has a 41 amino acid region which was found to be homologous
to the N-termini of several other zinc finger proteins. This region defines a new
motif within zinc finger proteins which we have named the Zinc finger N-terminal 
(ZiN) domain. ZF5 binds to two sites in the c-myc promoter and to the -50 bp site
of the herpes simplex thymidine kinase promoter. ZF5 is a transcriptional
repressor and its repression domain is located N-terminal to the zinc finger
domains. A single 4 kb ZF5 mRNA is expressed widely.

PMCID: PMC309887
PMID: 8367294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


