
1. J Hepatol. 2016 Mar 4. pii: S0168-8278(16)30009-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jhep.2016.02.043. [Epub ahead of print]

Resminostat in combination with sorafenib as second-line therapy of advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma - The SHELTER Study.

Bitzer M(1), Horger M(2), Giannini EG(3), Ganten TM(4), Wörns MA(5), Siveke
JT(6), Dollinger MM(7), Gerken G(8), Scheulen ME(9), Wege H(10), Zagonel V(11),
Cillo U(12), Trevisani F(13), Santoro A(14), Montesarchio V(15), Malek NP(16),
Holzapfel J(17), Herz T(17), Ammendola AS(17), Pegoraro S(17), Hauns B(17), Mais 
A(17), Lauer UM(16), Henning SW(17), Hentsch B(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Eberhard-Karls-University, Tuebingen,
Germany. Electronic address: michael.bitzer@uni-tuebingen.de. (2)Department of
Diagnostic & Interventional Radiology, Eberhard-Karls-University, Tuebingen,
Germany. (3)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (5)First Department of Medicine, Johannes
Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany. (6)Second Department of Internal Medicine, 
Technical University, Munich, Germany. (7)Internal Medicine I, University Ulm,
Ulm, Germany. (8)Center for Internal Medicine, University Clinic Essen, Germany. 
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, Essen, Germany.
(10)University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (11)Medical Oncology
Unit 1, Istituto Oncologico Veneto, IRCCS, Padova, Italy. (12)Hepatobiliary
Surgery and Liver Transplant Unit, Azienda Università di Padova, Padova, Italy.
(13)University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (14)Department of Oncology, Humanitas 
Cancer Center, Rozzano, Italy. (15)UO Oncologia Ospedale Cotugno Napoli, Napoli, 
Italy. (16)Department of Internal Medicine I, Eberhard-Karls-University,
Tuebingen, Germany. (17)4SC AG, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: No established therapies for patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and progression on first-line sorafenib treatment currently
exist. This phase I/II trial investigated safety, pharmacokinetics (PK) and
potential biomarkers of the deacetylase inhibitor (HDAC) resminostat and a
combination therapy with resminostat and sorafenib.
METHODS: Patients with HCC and radiologically confirmed progression on sorafenib 
were treated in an exploratory, multi-center, open-label, uncontrolled,
non-randomized, parallel group phase I/II study. In the combination group (n =
38) four dose levels ranged from daily 200 to 600 mg resminostat plus 400 to 800 
mg sorafenib. The monotherapy group (n = 19) received 600 mg resminostat.
RESULTS: 57 patients received treatment. Most common adverse events were
gastrointestinal disorders, thrombocytopenia and fatigue. Median maximal HDAC
inhibition and highest increase in H4-acetylation matched Tmax of resminostat.
Sorafenib or the Child-Pugh score did not affect typical PK characteristics of
resminostat. Efficacy assessment as PFS-rate after 6treatment cycles (12 weeks,
primary endpoint) was 12.5% for resminostat and 62.5% for resminostat plus
sorafenib. Median TTP and OS were 1.8 and 4.1 months for resminostat and 6.5 and 
8.0 months for the combination, respectively. Zinc finger protein 64 (ZFP64)
baseline expression in blood cells was found to correlate with OS.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of sorafenib and resminostat in HCC patients was
safe and showed early signs of efficacy. Sorafenib did not alter the PK profile
of resminostat or its HDAC inhibitory activity in vivo. A prognostic and
potentially predictive role of ZFP64 for treatment with resminostat should be
further investigated in HCC and possibly other cancer indications.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26952006  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Jul 31. [Epub ahead of print]

A Pooling Genome-Wide Association Study Combining a Pathway Analysis for Typical 
Sporadic Parkinson's Disease in the Han Population of Chinese Mainland.

Hu Y(1), Deng L, Zhang J, Fang X, Mei P, Cao X, Lin J, Wei Y, Zhang X, Xu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, 330006, Jiangxi, China, zenzixiao_ren@126.com.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on sporadic Parkinson's disease (sPD) are 
mainly conducted in European and American populations at present, and the Han
populations of Chinese mainland (HPCM) almost have not been studied yet. Here, we
conducted a pooling GWAS combining a pathway analysis with 862,198 autosomal
single nucleotide polymorphisms of IlluminaHumanOmniZhongHua-8 in 250 sPD and 250
controls from HPCM precluded toxicant exposure, age, and heavy coffee drinking
habit interference. We revealed that among the 22 potential loci implicated,
PRDM2/KIAA1026 (kgp8090149), TSG1/MANEA (kgp154172), PDE10A (kgp8130520), MDGA2
(rs9323124), ATPBD4/LOC100288892 (kgp11333367), ZFP64/TSHZ2 (kgp4156164),
PAQR3/ARD1B (kgp9482779), FLJ23172/FNDC3B (kgp760898), C18orf1 (kgp348599),
FLJ43860/NCRNA00051 (kgp4105983), CYP1B1/C2orf58 (kgp11353523), WNT9A/LOC728728
(rs849898), ANXA1/LOC100130911 (rs10746953), FLJ35379/LOC100132423 (kgp9550589), 
PLEKHN1 (kgp7172368), DMRT2/SMARCA2 (kgp10769919), ZNF396/INO80C (rs1362858),
C3orf67/LOC339902 (rs6783485), LOC285194/IGSF11 (rs1879553), FGF10/MRPS30
(rs13153459), BARX1/PTPDC1 (kgp6542803), and COL5 A2 (rs11186), the peak
significance was at the kgp4105983 of FLJ43860 gene in chromosome 8, the first
top strongest associated locus with sPD was PRDM2 (kgp8090149) in chromosome 1,
and the 24 pathways including 100 significantly associated genes were strongly
associated with sPD from HPCM. The 40 genes were shared by at least two pathways.
The most possible associated pathways with sPD were axon guidance, ECM-receptor
interaction, neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, tight junction, focal
adhesion, gap junction, long-term depression, drug metabolism-cytochrome P450,
adherens junction, endocytosis, and protein digestion and absorption. Our results
indicated that these loci, pathways, and their related genes might be involved in
the pathogenesis of sPD from HPCM and provided some novel evidences for further
searching the genetic pathogenesis of sPD.

PMID: 26227905  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Hepatol Int. 2015 Jul;9(3):438-46. doi: 10.1007/s12072-015-9642-0. Epub 2015 Jun 
12.

Multiple genes identified as targets for 20q13.12-13.33 gain contributing to
unfavorable clinical outcomes in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wang D(1), Zhu ZZ, Jiang H, Zhu J, Cong WM, Wen BJ, He SQ, Liu SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, 37 Yiyuan Street, Harbin, 150001, China, dongwangharbin@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent chromosome 20q gain is implicated in progressive cancer
behaviors and has been associated with clinical outcomes in multiple types of
cancer; however, its prognostic significance in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and the involved genes remain unclear.
METHODS: Array comparative genomic hybridization and expression arrays were used 
to detect copy number alterations (CNAs) and expression levels, respectively. The
associations between CNAs in 20q and outcomes were analyzed on 66 patients, for
which the follow-up period was 2.6-73.3 months. One hundred seventeen tumors were
further investigated to identify target genes in the potentially outcome-related 
CNAs.
RESULTS: Regional or whole 20q gain was detected in 24 (36.4%) of the 66 HCC
cases. The most recurrent gains were 20q11.21-12, 20q12-13.12, 20q13.12-13.33 and
20q13.33. Of the CNAs, 20q13.12-13.33 gain was significantly associated with
reduced extrohepatic metastasis-free and overall survival, as well as with
elevated postoperative AFP level, tumor vascular invasion and advanced tumor
stage. Multivariate Cox analysis identified 20q13.12-13.33 gain as an independent
prognostic marker for metastasis (HR 3.73, 95% CI 1.08-12.87) and death (HR 3.00,
95% CI 1.26-7.13). A panel of 19 genes in 20q13.12-13.33 was significantly
overexpressed in HCCs with gain compared to HCCs without. High expression
(greater than median) for 5 of the 19 genes, DDX27, B4GALT5, RNF114, ZFP64 and
PFDN4, correlated significantly with vascular invasion, and high RNF114
expression also with advanced tumor stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Gain at 20q13.12-13.33 is a prognostic marker of metastasis and
death, and DDX27, B4GALT5, RNF114, ZFP64, and PFDN4 are probable target genes
which may be involved together in the unfavorable outcomes of HCC patients.

PMID: 26067772  [PubMed - in process]


4. Epigenetics. 2013 Sep;8(9):921-34. doi: 10.4161/epi.25577. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Genome-scale analysis of DNA methylation in colorectal cancer using Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChips.

Naumov VA(1), Generozov EV, Zaharjevskaya NB, Matushkina DS, Larin AK, Chernyshov
SV, Alekseev MV, Shelygin YA, Govorun VM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Physical Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biology
Agency of Russian Federation; Moscow, Russia.

Illumina's Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays were used to examine
genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in 22 sample pairs from colorectal cancer
(CRC) and adjacent tissues and 19 colon tissue samples from cancer-free donors.
We show that the methylation profiles of tumors and healthy tissue samples can be
clearly distinguished from one another and that the main source of methylation
variability is associated with disease status. We used different statistical
approaches to evaluate the methylation data. In general, at the CpG-site level,
we found that common CRC-specific methylation patterns consist of at least 15,667
CpG sites that were significantly different from either adjacent healthy tissue
or tissue from cancer-free subjects. Of these sites, 10,342 were hypermethylated 
in CRC, and 5,325 were hypomethylated. Hypermethylated sites were common in the
maximum number of sample pairs and were mostly located in CpG islands, where they
were significantly enriched for differentially methylated regions known to be
cancer-specific. In contrast, hypomethylated sites were mostly located in CpG
shores and were generally sample-specific. Despite the considerable variability
in methylation data, we selected a panel of 14 highly robust candidates showing
methylation marks in genes SND1, ADHFE1, OPLAH, TLX2, C1orf70, ZFP64, NR5A2, and 
COL4A. This set was successfully cross-validated using methylation data from 209 
CRC samples and 38 healthy tissue samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas consortium
(AUC = 0.981 [95% CI: 0.9677-0.9939], sensitivity = 100% and specificity = 82%). 
In summary, this study reports a large number of loci with novel differential
methylation statuses, some of which may serve as candidate markers for diagnostic
purposes.

PMCID: PMC3883769
PMID: 23867710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24600-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.473397. Epub 2013
Jul 15.

Zinc finger protein 64 promotes Toll-like receptor-triggered proinflammatory and 
type I interferon production in macrophages by enhancing p65 subunit activation.

Wang C(1), Liu X, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Yao Z, Huang B, Zhang P, Li N, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology and Department of
Immunology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

The molecular mechanisms that fine-tune the Toll-like receptor (TLR)-triggered
innate immune response need further investigation. As an important transcription 
factor, zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) play important roles in many cell functions, 
including development, differentiation, tumorigenesis, and functions of the
immune system. However, the role of ZFP members in the innate immune responses
remains unclear. Here we showed that the expression of C2H2-type ZFP, ZFP64, was 
significantly up-regulated in macrophages upon stimulation with TLR ligands,
including LPS, CpG oligodeoxynucleotides, or poly(I:C). ZFP64 overexpression
promoted TLR-triggered TNF-a, IL-6, and IFN-ß production in macrophages.
Coincidently, knockdown of ZFP64 expression significantly inhibited the
production of the above cytokines. However, activation of MAPK and IRF3 was not
responsible for the ZFP64-mediated promotion of cytokine production.
Interestingly, ZFP64 significantly up-regulated TLR-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation.
ZFP64 could bind to the promoter of the TNF-a, IL-6, and IFN-ß genes in
macrophages only after TLR ligation. Furthermore, ZFP64 associated with the NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 subunit upon LPS stimulation, and TLR-ligated macrophages showed a lower
level of p65 recruitment to the TNF-a, IL-6, and IFN-ß gene promoter in the
absence of ZFP64. The data identify ZFP64 as a downstream positive regulator of
TLR-initiated innate immune responses by associating with the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit, 
enhancing p65 recruitment to the target gene promoters and increasing p65
activation and, thus, leading to the promotion of TLR-triggered proinflammatory
cytokine and type I interferon production. Our findings add mechanistic insight
into the efficient activation of the TLR innate response against invading
pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3750158
PMID: 23857586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Genetics. 2011 Sep;189(1):109-22. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.130088. Epub 2011 Jul
29.

A survey for novel imprinted genes in the mouse placenta by mRNA-seq.

Wang X(1), Soloway PD, Clark AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell Center for Comparative
and Population Genomics, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Many questions about the regulation, functional specialization, computational
prediction, and evolution of genomic imprinting would be better addressed by
having an exhaustive genome-wide catalog of genes that display parent-of-origin
differential expression. As a first-pass scan for novel imprinted genes, we
performed mRNA-seq experiments on embryonic day 17.5 (E17.5) mouse placenta cDNA 
samples from reciprocal cross F1 progeny of AKR and PWD mouse strains and
quantified the allele-specific expression and the degree of parent-of-origin
allelic imbalance. We confirmed the imprinting status of 23 known imprinted genes
in the placenta and found that 12 genes reported previously to be imprinted in
other tissues are also imprinted in mouse placenta. Through a well-replicated
design using an orthogonal allelic-expression technology, we verified 5 novel
imprinted genes that were not previously known to be imprinted in mouse (Pde10,
Phf17, Phactr2, Zfp64, and Htra3). Our data suggest that most of the strongly
imprinted genes have already been identified, at least in the placenta, and that 
evidence supports perhaps 100 additional weakly imprinted genes. Despite previous
appearance that the placenta tends to display an excess of maternally expressed
imprinted genes, with the addition of our validated set of placenta-imprinted
genes, this maternal bias has disappeared.

PMCID: PMC3176116
PMID: 21705755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Feb;50(2):113-21. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20836.

High-resolution genomic screening in mantle cell lymphoma--specific changes
correlate with genomic complexity, the proliferation signature and survival.

Halldórsdóttir AM(1), Sander B, Göransson H, Isaksson A, Kimby E, Mansouri M,
Rosenquist R, Ehrencrona H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
anna.margret.halldorsdottir@klinimm.uu.se

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32) and numerous
copy number aberrations (CNAs). Recently, gene expression profiling defined a
proliferation gene expression signature in MCL where high scores predict shorter 
survival. We investigated 31 MCL cases using high-density single nucleotide
polymorphism arrays and correlated CNA patterns with the proliferation signature 
and with clinical data. Many recurrent CNAs typical of MCL were detected,
including losses at 1p (55%), 8p (29%), 9q (29%), 11q (55%), 13q (42%) and 17p
(32%), and gains at 3q (39%), 8q (26%), 15q (23%) and 18q (23%). A novel deleted 
region at 20q (16%) contained only one candidate gene, ZFP64, a putative tumor
suppressor. Unsupervised clustering identified subgroups with different patterns 
of CNAs, including a subset (19%) characterized by the presence of 11q loss in
all cases and by the absence of 13q loss, and 3q and 7p gains. Losses at 1p, 8p, 
13q and 17p were associated with increased genomic complexity. High proliferation
signature scores correlated with increased number of large (>15 Mbp) CNAs (P =
0.03) as well as copy number gains at 7p (P = 0.02) and losses at 9q (P = 0.04). 
Furthermore, large/complex 13q losses were associated with improved survival (P <
0.05) as were losses/copy number neutral LOH at 19p13 (P = 0.01). In summary,
this high-resolution genomic analysis identified novel aberrations and revealed
that several CNAs correlated with genomic complexity, the proliferation status
and survival.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21117067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2010 Apr;9(2):149-53.

Proteomic analysis of differentially expressed proteins involving in liver
metastasis of human colorectal carcinoma.

Li SY(1), An P, Cai HY, Bai X, Zhang YN, Yu B, Zuo FY, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, General Hospital of Beijing Military Command,
Beijing 100700, China. lsybz@126.com

BACKGROUND: Early diagnosis of liver metastasis of colorectal carcinoma is very
important for the appropriate treatment of such patients. However, there has been
no effective approach available for clinical application. The present study aimed
to investigate the differential expression of proteins in patients with liver
metastasis of colorectal carcinomas using proteomic analysis and evaluate its
potentiality in clinical diagnosis.
METHODS: Fluorescence two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis (2-D
DIGE) was used to analyze and compare the protein expression between normal
mucosa, the primary focus, and liver metastases. Proteomic analysis was made to
identify the differentially expressed proteins. Immunohistological staining was
used to confirm the expression of differentially expressed proteins in colorectal
carcinomas and areas of liver metastasis.
RESULTS: A 1.5-fold difference was found with 46 differentially expressed
proteins. In 20 differentially expressed proteins, 3 were down-regulated and 17
up-regulated in liver metastases. Proteomic analysis showed that the
S-adenosylmethionine transgelin variant was down-regulated in liver metastasis
tissues. Zinc finger protein 64 homolog (Zfp64), guanine nucleotide exchange
factor 4 (GEF4), human arginase, glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) A3, and tumor 
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)-induced protein 9 were up-regulated in liver
metastasis tissues. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed that human arginase
expression was higher in liver metastases than in the primary focus.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a significant difference in protein expression between the
primary focus of colorectal carcinoma and liver metastases. The differentially
regulated proteins were closely related to liver metastasis of colorectal
carcinoma. Elevated human arginase may be an important molecular marker for liver
metastasis from colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 20382585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;127(11):2500-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25271.

Molecular analysis of gastric differentiated-type intramucosal and submucosal
cancers.

Sugai T(1), Habano W, Endoh M, Konishi Y, Akasaka R, Toyota M, Yamano H, Koeda K,
Wakabayashi G, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Diagnostic Pathology, Department of Pathology, School of
Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Morioka, Japan. tsugai@cocoa.ocn.ne.jp

Identification of the molecular characteristics of intramucosal (IMCs) and
submucosal cancers (SMCs) is essential to our understanding of early gastric
carcinogenesis. However, little is known regarding the differences between the 2 
lesions. One hundred and forty-eight patients with primary early gastric cancer
[IMC, 106; SMC, 42] were characterized for expression of cell cycle-related
proteins and loss of heterozygosity (LOH). We also examined microsatellite
instability (MSI) and methylation status. For LOH and methylation studies, we
used a panel of 17 microsatellite markers (3p, 4p, 5q, 9p. 13q, 17p, 18q and 22q)
and promoter regions of 9 genes (MLH-1, RUNX3, p16, HPP1, RASSF2A, SFRP1, DKK-1, 
ZFP64 and SALL4) that are frequently altered or methylated in gastric cancers.
Overexpression of p53 and cyclin D1 was observed in SMC. In addition, low
expression of p27 was more frequent in SMC than in IMC. Frequencies of 4p, 9p,
13q and 22q were significantly higher in SMC than in IMC. The SALL4 gene was
frequently methylated in SMC compared with IMC. However, other gene methylations 
were common in both IMC and SMC. The frequency of LOH-high status/methylation-low
status was significantly higher in SMC than in IMC. However, LOH-low
status/methylation-high status in SMC was more frequently found in IMC. Our data 
confirm that methylation of cancer-related genes plays a major role in the
development of IMCs. Importantly, the results also show that gastric submucosal
progression is characterized by the accumulation of specific genetic alterations.
In addition, changes of cell cycle-related proteins are associated with cancer
progression.

PMID: 20178104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Cell Sci. 2008 May 15;121(Pt 10):1613-23. doi: 10.1242/jcs.023119. Epub 2008
Apr 22.

Zfp64 participates in Notch signaling and regulates differentiation in
mesenchymal cells.

Sakamoto K(1), Tamamura Y, Katsube K, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan. s-kei.mpa@tmd.ac.jp

Notch signaling is required for multiple aspects of tissue and cell
differentiation. In this study, we identified zinc finger protein 64 (Zfp64) as a
novel coactivator of Notch1. Zfp64 is associated with the intracellular domain of
Notch1, recruited to the promoters of the Notch target genes Hes1 and Hey1, and
transactivates them. Zfp64 expression is under the control of Runx2, and is
upregulated by direct transactivation of its promoter. Zfp64 suppresses the
myogenic differentiation of C2C12 cells and promotes their osteoblastic
differentiation. Our data demonstrate two functions of Zfp64: (1) it is a
downstream target of Runx2 and, (2) its cognate protein acts as a coactivator of 
Notch1, which suggests that Zfp64 mediates mesenchymal cell differentiation by
modulating Notch signaling.

PMID: 18430783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2008 Feb 1;155(3):623-34. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Differential display analysis of gene expression in female-to-male sex-reversing 
gonads of the frog Rana rugosa.

Okada G(1), Maruo K, Funada S, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Education and Integrated Arts and Sciences, 
Waseda University, 1-6-1 Nishi-Waseda, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8050, Japan.

Sex steroids play pivotal roles in gonadal differentiation in many species of
vertebrates. The sex can be reversed from female to male by testosterone in the
Japanese wrinkled frog Rana rugosa, but it is still unclear what genes are up- or
down-regulated during the XX sex-reversal in this species. To search the genes
for the female-to-male sex-reversal, we employed differential display and
5'/3'-RACE. Consequently, we isolated from the gonads at day 8 after testosterone
injection 24 different cDNA fragments showing a testosterone treatment-related
change and then obtained three full-length cDNAs, which we termed Zfp64, Zfp112, 
and Rrp54. The former two cDNAs encoded different proteins with zinc-finger
domains, whereas the latter cDNA encoded an unknown protein. Transcripts of the
three genes were hardly detectable in the sex-reversing gonads at day 24 after
the injection; at this time few growing oocytes were observed in the
sex-reversing gonad. Besides, in situ hybridization analysis showed positive
signals of the three genes in the cytoplasm of growing oocytes of an ovary when
testosterone was injected into a tadpole. Thus, the decrease in expression of
these three genes was probably due to the disappearance of growing oocytes and
not to their direct involvement in the testis formation. To find the key-gene for
testis formation, it will be necessary to analyze, by the differential display
method, more genes showing a change in expression pattern during sex reversal.

PMID: 17942098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Cancer. 2007 Oct 1;121(7):1487-93.

Novel approach for detecting global epigenetic alterations associated with tumor 
cell aneuploidy.

Habano W(1), Sugai T, Jiao YF, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of DNA Laboratory, Central Clinical Laboratory, School of Medicine,
Iwate Medical University, Morioka 020-8505, Japan. whabano@iwate-med.ac.jp

Although aneuploidy is commonly observed in human cancers, the molecular
mechanism underlying aneuploidization remains unclear. We used multiploid cancer 
model that had diploid and aneuploid cancer cells within the same cancerous
tissue and attempted to detect specific epigenetic alterations associated with
tumor cell aneuploidy. Thirty-four multiploid colorectal cancers were subjected
to crypt isolation and cell sorting, and paired diploid and aneuploid cancer
cells were separated from each cancerous tissue. A methylated CpG island
amplification provided a considerable number of CpG sequences that showed
different methylation status between the above 2 cell populations. BLAST homology
search revealed 24 different candidates (11 hypermethylated and 13
hypomethylated) from these sequences. The putative promoter sequence of the SALL4
(sal-like 4, a human homolog to Drosophila spalt) gene was particularly more
frequently hypermethylated in aneuploid cells (62%) than diploid ones (35%) in
the 34 multiploid cancers. Moreover, such hypermethylation occurred more often in
aneuploid cancers (8 of 16, 50%) than diploid cancers (3 of 18, 17%). In
combination with demethylation study on cultured cells, these results implied a
possible association between epigenetic silencing of SALL4 and tumor cell
aneuploidy. SALL4 may be one of important key players that act as "caretakers"
for chromosomal stability. Our new approach is a powerful tool for the global
identification of such key players.

PMID: 17546590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Gene. 1997 Jan 31;185(1):11-7.

A search for a mammalian homologue of the Drosophila photoreceptor development
gene glass yields Zfp64, a zinc finger encoding gene which maps to the distal end
of mouse chromosome 2.

Mack HG(1), Beck F, Bowtell DD.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, Parkville,
Vic., Australia.

Whilst searching for a mammalian homologue of the Drosophila glass gene we cloned
a mouse cDNA whose deduced sequence encodes a 614 amino acid (aa) protein with
ten Cys2-His2 (C2H2) zinc finger (Zf) motifs. Zfp64 is expressed in all
developing and mature mouse tissues examined, except the mouse erythroleukemia
(MEL) cell line. Zfp64 maps to the distal region of mouse chromosome 2 close to
lens opacity 4 (Lop4), a semidominant cataract mutation. Sequence analysis shows 
that Zfp64 has multiple potential phosphorylation sites for casein kinase II (CK 
II), protein kinase C (PKC), tyrosine kinase (TK) and c-AMP- and c-GMP-dependent 
protein kinase (cA/GMPDPK).

PMID: 9034307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


