
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 23;9(6):e100924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100924.
eCollection 2014.

Large-scale East-Asian eQTL mapping reveals novel candidate genes for LD mapping 
and the genomic landscape of transcriptional effects of sequence variants.

Narahara M(1), Higasa K(2), Nakamura S(3), Tabara Y(2), Kawaguchi T(2), Ishii
M(3), Matsubara K(3), Matsuda F(2), Yamada R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Statistical Genetics, Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Human Disease Genomics, Center for Genomic
Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (3)DNA Chip
Research Inc., Kanagawa, Japan.

Profiles of sequence variants that influence gene transcription are very
important for understanding mechanisms that affect phenotypic variation and
disease susceptibility. Using genotypes at 1.4 million SNPs and a comprehensive
transcriptional profile of 15,454 coding genes and 6,113 lincRNA genes obtained
from peripheral blood cells of 298 Japanese individuals, we mapped expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). We identified 3,804 cis-eQTLs (within 500 kb
from target genes) and 165 trans-eQTLs (>500 kb away or on different
chromosomes). Cis-eQTLs were often located in transcribed or adjacent regions of 
genes; among these regions, 5' untranslated regions and 5' flanking regions had
the largest effects. Epigenetic evidence for regulatory potential accumulated in 
public databases explained the magnitude of the effects of our eQTLs. Cis-eQTLs
were often located near the respective target genes, if not within genes. Large
effect sizes were observed with eQTLs near target genes, and effect sizes were
obviously attenuated as the eQTL distance from the gene increased. Using a very
stringent significance threshold, we identified 165 large-effect trans-eQTLs. We 
used our eQTL map to assess 8,069 disease-associated SNPs identified in 1,436
genome-wide association studies (GWAS). We identified genes that might be truly
causative, but GWAS might have failed to identify for 148 out of the
GWAS-identified SNPs; for example, TUFM (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.3E-48) was identified for
inflammatory bowel disease (early onset); ZFP90 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.4E-34) for ulcerative
colitis; and IDUA (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.2E-11) for Parkinson's disease. We identified four genes
(P<2.0E-14) that might be related to three diseases and two hematological traits;
each expression is regulated by trans-eQTLs on a different chromosome than the
gene.

PMCID: PMC4067418
PMID: 24956270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gene. 2012 May 1;498(2):328-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.028. Epub 2012 Feb 3.

16q22.1 microdeletion detected by array-CGH in a family with mental retardation
and lobular breast cancer.

Palka Bayard de Volo C(1), Alfonsi M, Gatta V, Novelli A, Bernardini L, Fantasia 
D, Antonucci I, Angelucci D, Zori R, Stuppia L, Chiarelli F, Calabrese G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, "G. d'Annunzio" University, Chieti, Italy.
chiarapalka@libero.it

We describe the case of a boy with psychomotor delay and dysmorphic features,
with a germline 16q22.1 microdeletion identified by array-CGH. The deletion spans
0.24Mb and encompasses three genes (ZFP90, CDH3 and CDH1). The deletion has been 
demonstrated to be inherited from his mother who was affected by lobular breast
cancer (LBC) without any other apparently phenotypic features. We suppose that
the microdeletion, in particular ZFP90 which is cerebrally expressed, is
causative for the boy's phenotype. Mental retardation in the affected boy can
recognize several mechanisms such as variable expressivity, non-penetrance,
multifactorial/polygenic inheritance, recessive inheritance, a second
rearrangement event and epigenetics. Furthermore, we suggest that the deletion of
the CDH1, a tumor suppressor gene, involved in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer 
(HDGC) and LBC predisposed the mother to the carcinoma.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22326525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jul 15;20(14):2879-88. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr190. Epub 2011 Apr
29.

Fine-mapping of colorectal cancer susceptibility loci at 8q23.3, 16q22.1 and
19q13.11: refinement of association signals and use of in silico analysis to
suggest functional variation and unexpected candidate target genes.

Carvajal-Carmona LG(1), Cazier JB, Jones AM, Howarth K, Broderick P, Pittman A,
Dobbins S, Tenesa A, Farrington S, Prendergast J, Theodoratou E, Barnetson R,
Conti D, Newcomb P, Hopper JL, Jenkins MA, Gallinger S, Duggan DJ, Campbell H,
Kerr D, Casey G, Houlston R, Dunlop M, Tomlinson I.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics and Department of Clinical
Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. luis@well.ox.ac.uk

We have previously identified several colorectal cancer (CRC)-associated
polymorphisms using genome-wide association (GWA) analysis. We sought to fine-map
the location of the functional variants for three of these regions at 8q23.3
(EIF3H), 16q22.1 (CDH1/CDH3) and 19q13.11 (RHPN2). We genotyped two case-control 
sets at high density in the selected regions and used existing data from four
other case-control sets, comprising a total of 9328 CRC cases and 10 480
controls. To improve marker density, we imputed genotypes from the 1000 Genomes
Project and Hapmap3 data sets. All three regions contained smaller areas in which
a cluster of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) showed clearly stronger
association signals than surrounding SNPs, allowing us to assign those areas as
the most likely location of the disease-associated functional variant. Further
fine-mapping within those areas was generally unhelpful in identifying the
functional variation based on strengths of association. However, functional
annotation suggested a relatively small number of functional SNPs, including some
with potential regulatory function at 8q23.3 and 16q22.1 and a non-synonymous SNP
in RPHN2. Interestingly, the expression quantitative trait locus browser showed a
number of highly associated SNP alleles correlated with mRNA expression levels
not of EIF3H and CDH1 or CDH3, but of UTP23 and ZFP90, respectively. In contrast,
none of the top SNPs within these regions was associated with transcript levels
at EIF3H, CDH1 or CDH3. Our post-GWA study highlights benefits of fine-mapping of
common disease variants in combination with publicly available data sets. In
addition, caution should be exercised when assigning functionality to candidate
genes in regions discovered through GWA analysis.

PMCID: PMC3118761
PMID: 21531788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Jun;50(6):972-81. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.01.017. Epub
2011 Jan 31.

Zinc-finger protein 90 negatively regulates neuron-restrictive silencer
factor-mediated transcriptional repression of fetal cardiac genes.

Hata L(1), Murakami M, Kuwahara K, Nakagawa Y, Kinoshita H, Usami S, Yasuno S,
Fujiwara M, Kuwabara Y, Minami T, Yamada Y, Yamada C, Nakao K, Ueshima K,
Nishikimi T, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF) is a zinc-finger transcription factor
that binds to specific DNA sequences (NRSE) to repress transcription. By
down-regulating the transcription of its target genes, NRSF contributes to the
regulation of various biological processes, including neuronal differentiation,
carcinogenesis and cardiovascular homeostasis. We previously reported that NRSF
regulates expression of the cardiac fetal gene program, and that attenuation of
NRSF-mediated repression contributes to genetic remodeling in hearts under
pathological conditions. The precise molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways 
via which NRSF activity is regulated in pathological conditions of the heart
remain unclear, however. In this study, to search for regulators of NRSF, we
carried out yeast two-hybrid screening using NRSF as bait and identified
zinc-finger protein (Zfp) 90 as a novel NRSF-binding protein. NRSF and Zfp90
colocalized in the nucleus, with the zinc-finger DNA-binding domain of the former
specifically interacting with the latter. Zfp90 inhibited the repressor activity 
of NRSF by inhibiting its binding to DNA, thereby derepressing transcription of
NRSF-target genes. Knockdown of Zfp90 by siRNA led to reduced expression of
NRSF-target fetal cardiac genes, atrial and brain natriuretic peptide genes, and 
conversely, overexpression of Zfp90 in ventricular myocardium resulted in
significant increases in the expression of these genes. Notably, expression of
Zfp90 mRNA was significantly upregulated in mouse and human hearts with chronic
heart failure. Collectively, these results suggest that Zfp90 functions as a
negative regulator of NRSF and contributes to genetic remodeling during the
development of cardiac dysfunction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21284946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Jan 28;14(4):574-81.

Gene modulation associated with inhibition of liver regeneration in hepatitis B
virus X transgenic mice.

Sidorkiewicz M(1), Jais JP, Tralhao G, Morosan S, Giannini C, Brezillon N,
Soussan P, Delpuech O, Kremsdorf D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM (Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale) U845, CHU
Necker, 156 rue de Vaugirard, Paris 75015, France.

AIM: To analyze the modulation of gene expression profile associated with
inhibition of liver regeneration in hepatitis B X (HBx)-expressing transgenic
mice.
METHODS: Microarray technology was performed on liver tissue obtained from 4
control (LacZ) and 4 transgenic mice (HBx-LacZ), 48 h after partial hepatectomy. 
The significance of the normalized log-ratios was assessed for each gene, using
robust t-tests under an empirical Bayes approach. Microarray hybridization data
was verified on selected genes by quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: The comparison of gene expression patterns showed a consistent
modulation of the expression of 26 genes, most of which are implicated in liver
regeneration. Up-regulated genes included DNA repair proteins (Rad-52, MSH6) and 
transmembrane proteins (syndecan 4, tetraspanin), while down-regulated genes were
connected to the regulation of transcription (histone deacetylase, Zfp90, MyoD1) 
and were involved in the cholesterol metabolic pathway and isoprenoid
biosynthesis (farnesyl diphosphate synthase, Cyp7b1, geranylgeranyl diphosphate
synthase, SAA3).
CONCLUSION: Our results provide a novel insight into the biological activities of
HBx, implicated in the inhibition of liver regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2681149
PMID: 18203290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Genet. 2005 Jul;37(7):710-7. Epub 2005 Jun 19.

An integrative genomics approach to infer causal associations between gene
expression and disease.

Schadt EE(1), Lamb J, Yang X, Zhu J, Edwards S, Guhathakurta D, Sieberts SK,
Monks S, Reitman M, Zhang C, Lum PY, Leonardson A, Thieringer R, Metzger JM, Yang
L, Castle J, Zhu H, Kash SF, Drake TA, Sachs A, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rosetta Inpharmatics, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA. eric_schadt@merck.com

A key goal of biomedical research is to elucidate the complex network of gene
interactions underlying complex traits such as common human diseases. Here we
detail a multistep procedure for identifying potential key drivers of complex
traits that integrates DNA-variation and gene-expression data with other complex 
trait data in segregating mouse populations. Ordering gene expression traits
relative to one another and relative to other complex traits is achieved by
systematically testing whether variations in DNA that lead to variations in
relative transcript abundances statistically support an independent, causative or
reactive function relative to the complex traits under consideration. We show
that this approach can predict transcriptional responses to single
gene-perturbation experiments using gene-expression data in the context of a
segregating mouse population. We also demonstrate the utility of this approach by
identifying and experimentally validating the involvement of three new genes in
susceptibility to obesity.

PMCID: PMC2841396
PMID: 15965475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biol Chem. 2001 Jun;382(6):891-902.

Biological activity of mammalian transcriptional repressors.

Thiel G(1), Lietz M, Bach K, Guethlein L, Cibelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical School, Homburg, Germany.

Research on the regulation of transcription in mammals has focused in recent
years mainly on the mechanism of transcriptional activation. However,
transcriptional repression mediated by repressor proteins is a common regulatory 
mechanism in mammals and might play an important role in many biological
processes. To understand the molecular mechanism of transcriptional repression,
the activity of eight mammalian repressors or repressor domains was investigated 
using a set of model promoters in combination with two different transcriptional 
detection methods. The repressors studied were: REST, the thyroid hormone
receptors alpha and beta, the zinc finger protein NK10 containing a
'krüppel-associated box' (KRAB), repressor domains derived from the proteins
Egr-1, Oct2A and Dr1 and the repressor/activator protein YY1. Here we show that
the repressor domains of REST, Egr-1, the thyroid hormone receptors alpha< and
beta and NK10 were transferable to a heterologous DNA-binding domain and
repressed transcription from proximal and distal positions. Moreover, these
repressor domains also blocked the activity of a strong viral enhancer in a
'remote position'. Thus, these domains are 'general' transcriptional repressor
domains. The 'krüppel-associated box' was the most powerful repressor domain
tested. In contrast, the repressor domains derived from Oct2A and Dr1 were
inactive when fused to a heterologous DNA-binding domain. The repressor domain of
YY1 exhibited transcriptional repression activity only in one of the
transcriptional assay systems. The recruitment of histone deacetylases to the
proximity of the basal transcriptional apparatus was recently discussed as a
mechanism for some mammalian transcriptional repressor proteins. Here we show
here that histone deacetylase 2, targeted to the reporter gene via DNA-protein
interaction, functions as a transcriptional repressor protein regardless of the
location of its binding site within the transcription unit.

PMID: 11501753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 Nov;14(11):971-81.

Developmentally regulated mouse gene NK10 encodes a zinc finger repressor protein
with differential DNA-binding domains.

Lange R(1), Christoph A, Thiesen HJ, Vopper G, Johnson KR, Lemaire L, Plomann M, 
Cremer H, Barthels D, Heinlein UA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Universität zu Köln, Germany.

Using oligonucleotides complementary to the conserved inter-finger region of a
variety of previously described zinc finger-encoding genes, a novel mouse gene
was cloned and characterized. The gene is localized on chromosome 8 and comprises
five exons. Its corresponding mRNA is developmentally regulated in various
tissues and includes an open reading frame encoding a protein of 72,422 daltons. 
It shares amino-terminal homologies with human KRAB (or FPB) boxes, and contains 
13 zinc fingers of the C2-H2 type. The NK10 KRAB domains exhibit repressing
activity when tested in GAL4 fusion protein assays. Cloning of putative target
sequences revealed that the individual domains differentially contribute to
zinc-dependent target DNA binding.

PMID: 7576184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


