
1. Neurology. 2016 Mar 9. pii: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002567. [Epub ahead of print]

Monozygotic twins with de novo ZIC2 gene mutations discordant for the type of
holoprosencephaly.

Nakayama J(1), Kinugasa H(2), Ohto T(2), Tanaka R(2), Nakayama T(2), Noguchi
E(2), Arinami T(2), Iwasaki N(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health Sciences (J.N., H.K., T.N., 
N.I.); and the University of Tsukuba (T.O., R.T., E.N., T.A.), Ibaraki, Japan.
nakayama@ipu.ac.jp. (2)From the Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health Sciences
(J.N., H.K., T.N., N.I.); and the University of Tsukuba (T.O., R.T., E.N., T.A.),
Ibaraki, Japan.

PMID: 26962069  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 6;6:16767. doi: 10.1038/srep16767.

Altered expression of mRNA profiles in blood of early-onset schizophrenia.

Xu Y(1), Yao Shugart Y(2), Wang G(3), Cheng Z(3), Jin C(3), Zhang K(3), Wang
J(3), Yu H(4,)(5), Yue W(4,)(5), Zhang F(3), Zhang D(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, First Hospital /First Clinical Medical College of
Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China. (2)Unit on Statistical Genomics,
Division of Intramural Research Program, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Wuxi Mental Health Center, Nanjing Medical University, Wuxi, Jiangsu Province,
China. (4)Institute of Mental Health, Sixth Hospital, Peking University; Beijing 
100191, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Ministry of Health &National
Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking University), Beijing,
100191, China. (6)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences/ PKU-IDG/McGovern
Institute for Brain Research, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.

To identify gene expression abnormalities in schizophrenia (SZ), we generated
whole-genome gene expression profiles using microarrays on peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 18 early-onset SZ cases and 12 controls. We
detected 84 transcripts differentially expressed by diagnostic status, with 82
genes being upregulated and 2 downregulated. We identified two SZ associated gene
coexpression modules (green and red), including 446 genes . The green module is
positively correlated with SZ, encompassing predominantly up-regulated genes in
SZ; while the red module was negatively correlated with disease status, involving
mostly nominally down-regulated genes in SZ. The olfactory transduction pathway
was the most enriched pathways for the genes within the two modules. The
expression levels of several hub genes, including AKT1, BRCA1, CCDC134, UBD, and 
ZIC2 were validated using real-time quantitative PCR. Our findings indicate that 
mRNA coexpression abnormalities may serve as a promising mechanism underlying the
development of SZ.

PMCID: PMC4702094
PMID: 26733343  [PubMed - in process]


3. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Apr;103:183-94. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.011.
Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Regulation of nucleus accumbens transcript levels in mice by early-life social
stress and cocaine.

Lo Iacono L(1), Valzania A(1), Visco-Comandini F(2), Viscomi MT(1), Felsani A(3),
Puglisi-Allegra S(4), Carola V(5).

Author information: 
(1)IRCSS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy. (2)Sobell Department of Motor
Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, University College of London, Great Britain,
UK. (3)Institute of Cellular Biology and Neurobiology, CNR, Rome, Italy. (4)IRCSS
Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy; Department of Psychology and "Daniel Bovet" 
Center, University of Rome "La Sapienza", Italy. (5)IRCSS Fondazione Santa Lucia,
Rome, Italy. Electronic address: valeria.carola@uniroma1.it.

Much interest has been piqued regarding the quality of one's environment at early
ages in modulating the susceptibility to drug addiction in adulthood. However,
the molecular mechanisms that are engaged during early trauma and mediate the
risk for drug addiction are poorly understood. In rodents, exposure to early-life
stress alters the rewarding effects of cocaine, amphetamine, and morphine in
adulthood. Recently, we demonstrated that the exposure of juvenile mice to social
threat (Social Stress, S-S) promoted cocaine-seeking behavior and relapse of
cocaine-seeking after periods of withdrawal, compared with unhandled controls
(UN) and with juvenile mice that experienced only daily isolation in a novel
environment (no social stress, NS-S). Interestingly, while the exposure to NS-S
slightly increased cocaine-seeking behavior compared with UN, the same was not
sufficient to promote cocaine reinstatement. In this study, we examined the
long-term transcriptional changes that are induced by S-S compared to NS-S and
linked the increased susceptibility of S-S mice to cocaine reinstatement. To this
end, we performed genome-wide RNA sequencing analysis in the nucleus accumbens
(NAC), which revealed that 89 transcripts were differentially expressed between
S-S and NS-S mice. By Gene Ontology classification, these hits were enriched in
genes that mediate cell proliferation, neuronal differentiation, and
neuron/forebrain development. Eleven of these genes have been reported to be
involved in substance use disorders, and the remaining genes are novel candidates
in this area. We characterized 4 candidates with regard to their significant
neurobiological relevance (ZIC1, ZIC2, FABP7, and PRDM12) and measured their
expression in the NAC by immunohistochemistry. These findings provide insights
into novel molecular mechanisms in NAC that might be associated with the risk of 
relapse in cocaine-dependent individuals.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26706499  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Clin Invest. 2015 Oct 1;125(10):3795-808. doi: 10.1172/JCI81979. Epub 2015 Aug 
31.

ZIC2-dependent OCT4 activation drives self-renewal of human liver cancer stem
cells.

Zhu P, Wang Y, He L, Huang G, Du Y, Zhang G, Yan X, Xia P, Ye B, Wang S, Hao L,
Wu J, Fan Z.

Liver cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been identified and shown to have
self-renewal and differentiation properties; however, the biology of these
hepatic CSCs remains largely unknown. Here, we analyzed transcriptome gene
expression profiles of liver CSCs and non-CSCs from hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells lines and found that the transcription factor (TF) ZIC2 is highly
expressed in liver CSCs. ZIC2 was required for the self-renewal maintenance of
liver CSCs, as ZIC2 depletion reduced sphere formation and xenograft tumor growth
in mice. We determined that ZIC2 acts upstream of the TF OCT4 and that ZIC2
recruits the nuclear remodeling factor (NURF) complex to the OCT4 promoter,
thereby initiating OCT4 activation. In HCC patients, expression levels of the
NURF complex were consistent with clinical severity and prognosis. Moreover, ZIC2
and OCT4 levels positively correlated to the clinicopathological stages of HCC
patients. Altogether, our results indicate that levels of ZIC2, OCT4, and the
NURF complex can be detected and used for diagnosis and prognosis prediction of
HCC patients. Moreover, these factors may be potential therapeutic targets for
eradicating liver CSCs.

PMCID: PMC4607118
PMID: 26426078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Brain Res. 2015 Nov 2;1625:324-36. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.08.026. Epub 2015
Sep 10.

Dopamine signaling regulates the projection patterns in the mouse chiasm.

Chen T(1), Hu Y(2), Lin X(3), Huang X(4), Liu B(5), Leung P(6), Chan SO(7), Guo
D(8), Jin G(9).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, PR China;
Wuhan University School of Basic Medical Sciences, PR China. Electronic address: 
jkf_ctt@163.com. (2)Cancer Research Center, Shenzhen University School of
Medicine, PR China; Wuhan University School of Basic Medical Sciences, PR China. 
Electronic address: jackyhu@126.com. (3)Shenzhen People's Hospital, PR China.
Electronic address: lxt99@126.com. (4)Cancer Research Center, Shenzhen University
School of Medicine, PR China. Electronic address: 451336657@qq.com. (5)Cancer
Research Center, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, PR China. Electronic
address: 1518822790@qq.com. (6)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, PR China..
Electronic address: peggleung@cuhk.edu.hk. (7)School of Biomedical Sciences, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, PR China..
Electronic address: sunonchan@cuhk.edu.hk. (8)Wuhan University School of Basic
Medical Sciences, PR China. (9)Cancer Research Center, Shenzhen University School
of Medicine, PR China. Electronic address: gyjin@szu.edu.cn.

Ocular albinism (OA) is characterized by inadequate L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine
(L-DOPA) and dopamine (DA) in the eyes. This study investigated DA-related
signaling pathways in mouse chiasm projection patterns and the potential role of 
ocular albinism type 1 (OA1) and dopamine 1A (D1A) receptors in the optic
pathway. In embryonic day (E) E13-E15 retina, most L-DOPA and OA1-positive cells 
were distributed among Müller glial cells on E13 and retinal ganglion cells (RGC)
on E14. In the ventral diencephalon, OA1 and L-DOPA were strongly expressed on
the optic chiasm (OC) and optic tract (OT), respectively, but weak on the optic
stalk (OS). At E13-E15, DA and D1A staining was predominately expressed in
radially arranged cells with a neuronal expression pattern. In the ventral
diencephalon, DA and D1A were strongly expressed on the OC, OT and OS.
Furthermore, L-DOPA significantly inhibited retinal axon outgrowth in both the
dorsal nasal (DN) and ventral temporal (VT) groups. DA inhibited retinal axon
outgrowth, which was abolished by the D1A antagonist SCH23390. Brain slice
cultures indicated that L-DOPA inhibited axons that crossed at the OC of E13
embryos, which was not abolished by DA. L-DOPA also inhibited axons that crossed 
at the OC of albino mice. Albino mice exhibited reduced ipsilateral retinal
projections compared with C57 pigmented mice. No significant difference was
identified in the uncrossed projections of albino mice following L-DOPA and DA
expression. Furthermore, transcription factor Zic family member 2 (Zic2)
upregulated OA1 mRNA expression. Our findings provide critical insights into
DA-related signaling in retinal development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26363092  [PubMed - in process]


6. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):28257-68. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4960.

Addiction of pancreatic cancer cells to zinc-finger transcription factor ZIC2.

Inaguma S(1), Ito H(1), Riku M(1), Ikeda H(1), Kasai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

Activity of GLI transcription factors of Hedgehog signaling is key for various
cancer cell properties, especially in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
Zinc-finger transcriptional regulators ZIC1 to ZIC5 of ZIC gene family were
demonstrated to associate with GLI to increase the nuclear accumulation and
transcriptional activity of GLI. Notwithstanding this supportive role for
GLI-dependent transcription, it was not fully understood whether ZIC plays an
independent role in cancer cell biology. Here, we found that ZIC2 is
indispensable in the regulation of PDAC cell apoptosis. We found that human PDAC 
cell lines uniquely express ZIC2. ZIC2 knockdown induced PDAC cell apoptosis;
conversely, ZIC2 over-expression enhanced the cellular proliferation. Through a
comprehensive screening, we identified fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
(FGFR3) and ANNEXIN A8 (ANXA8) as genes up-regulated by ZIC2 in PDAC cells. The
forced expression of these two genes cooperatively rescued the apoptosis of
ZIC2-knockdown cells. Immunohistochemical analyses further supported the
correlation of ZIC2 expression and these genes in human pancreata harboring PDAC.
Intriguingly, the ZIC2-mediated up-regulation of FGFR3 and ANXA8 was indicated to
be GLI -independent. This evidence highlights the indispensable role of ZIC2 in
regulating cellular proliferation and apoptosis during PDAC development and
suggests a potential therapeutic target for PDAC.

PMCID: PMC4695058
PMID: 26318045  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Neurosci. 2015 Aug 12;35(32):11266-80. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0779-15.2015.

Zic2 Controls the Migration of Specific Neuronal Populations in the Developing
Forebrain.

Murillo B(1), Ruiz-Reig N(1), Herrera M(1), Fairén A(1), Herrera E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Miguel Hernández), Campus San Juan, 03550 San Juan de
Alicante, Spain. (2)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante (Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Miguel Hernández), Campus San Juan, 03550
San Juan de Alicante, Spain e.herrera@umh.es.

Human mutations in ZIC2 have been identified in patients with holoprosencephaly
and schizophrenia. Similarly, Zic2 mutant mice exhibit holoprosencephaly in
homozygosis and behavioral and morphological schizophrenic phenotypes associated 
with forebrain defects in heterozygosis. Despite the devastating effects of
mutations in Zic2, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that provoke
Zic2-deficiency phenotypes are yet unclear. Here, we report a novel role for this
transcription factor in the migration of three different types of forebrain
neurons: the Cajal-Retzius cells that populate the surface of the telencephalic
vesicles, an amygdaloid group of cells originated in the caudal pole of the
telencephalic pallium, and a cell population that travels from the prethalamic
neuroepithelium to the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus. Our results also
suggest that the receptor EphB1, previously identified as a Zic2 target, may
mediate, at least partially, Zic2-dependent migratory events. According to these 
results, we propose that deficiencies in cell motility and guidance contribute to
most of the forebrain pathologies associated with Zic2 mutations.SIGNIFICANCE
STATEMENT: Although the phenotype of Zic2 mutant individuals was reported more
than 10 years ago, until now, the main function of this transcription factor
during early development has not been precisely defined. Here, we reveal a
previously unknown role for Zic2 in the migration of forebrain neurons such as
Cajal-Retzius cells, interneurons moving to the ventral lateral geniculate
nucleus, and neocortical cells going to the amygdala. We believe that the role of
this transcription factor in certain populations of migratory cells contributes
to defects in cortical layering and hypocellularity in the ventral LGN and
amygdala and will contribute to our understanding of the devastating phenotypes
associated with Zic2 mutations in both humans and mice.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3511266-15$15.00/0.

PMID: 26269635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 2015;55(8):640-6. doi: 10.2176/nmc.ra.2015-0075. Epub
2015 Jul 31.

Molecular Biology of Pediatric Hydrocephalus and Hydrocephalus-related Diseases.

Yamasaki M(1), Kanemura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Takatsuki General Hospital.

We are beginning to understand the molecular biology of hydrocephalus and its
related diseases. X-linked hydrocephalus (XLH), holoprosencephaly (HPE),
Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM), and neural tube defect (NTD) can all be
discussed with respect to their available molecular genetics knowledge base and
its clinical applications. XLH is single gene disorder caused by mutations in the
neural cell adhesion molecule-encoding L1CAM (L1) gene. Our knowledge of the
molecular basis of XLH is already being applied clinically in disease diagnosis, 
disease classification, and prenatal diagnosis. However, the molecular mechanism 
underlying XLH-related hydrocephalus still needs to be clarified. Sixteen
causative genes for HPE have been identified, of which mutations are most often
found in SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF. Genetic interactions, gene complexity, and
the wide variety of HPE phenotypes and genotypes are topics for future study. For
DWM, two important loci, 3q24, which includes the FOXC1 gene, and 6q25.3, which
includes the ZIC1 and ZIC4 genes, were recently identified as causative areas.
The planar cell polarity (PCP) genes CELSR1, CELSR2, VANGL1, and VANGL2 have been
implicated in NTD; these genes have roles in neural tube closure and ependymal
ciliary movement.

PMCID: PMC4628154
PMID: 26227058  [PubMed - in process]


9. Genesis. 2015 May;53(5):308-20. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22854. Epub 2015 May 5.

Early neural ectodermal genes are activated by Siamois and Twin during blastula
stages.

Klein SL(1), Moody SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, George Washington University, 
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 2300 I Street, Northwest, Washington, DC.

BMP signaling distinguishes between neural and non-neural fates by activating
epidermis-specific transcription and repressing neural-specific transcription.
The neural ectoderm forms after the Organizer secrets antagonists that prevent
these BMP-mediated activities. However, it is not known whether neural genes also
are transcriptionally activated. Therefore, we tested the ability of nine
Organizer transcription factors to ectopically induce the expression of four
neural ectodermal genes in epidermal precursors. We found evidence for two
pathways: Foxd4 and Sox11 were only induced by Sia and Twn, whereas Gmnn and Zic2
were induced by Sia, Twn, as well as seven other Organizer transcription factors.
The induction of Foxd4, Gmnn and Zic2 by Sia/Twn was both non-cell autonomous
(requiring an intermediate protein) and cell autonomous (direct), whereas the
induction of Sox11 required Foxd4 activity. Because direct induction by Sia/Twn
could occur endogenously in the dorsal-equatorial blastula cells that give rise
to both the Organizer mesoderm and the neural ectoderm, we knocked down Sia/Twn
in those cells. This prevented the blastula expression of Foxd4 and Sox11,
demonstrating that Sia/Twn directly activate some neural genes before the
separation of the Organizer mesoderm and neural ectoderm lineages.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25892704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Neurosci. 2015 May;18(5):647-56. doi: 10.1038/nn.3995. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Regulation of chromatin accessibility and Zic binding at enhancers in the
developing cerebellum.

Frank CL(1), Liu F(2), Wijayatunge R(2), Song L(3), Biegler MT(2), Yang MG(2),
Vockley CM(4), Safi A(3), Gersbach CA(5), Crawford GE(6), West AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Center for Genomic and Computational
Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA. (3)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (4)1] Center for Genomic and
Computational Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
USA. [2] Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina, USA. (5)1] Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (6)1]
Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Department of Pediatrics, Division of Molecular 
Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

To identify chromatin mechanisms of neuronal differentiation, we characterized
chromatin accessibility and gene expression in cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs) 
of the developing mouse. We used DNase-seq to map accessibility of cis-regulatory
elements and RNA-seq to profile transcript abundance across postnatal stages of
neuronal differentiation in vivo and in culture. We observed thousands of
chromatin accessibility changes as CGNs differentiated, and verified, using
H3K27ac ChIP-seq, reporter gene assays and CRISPR-mediated activation, that many 
of these regions function as neuronal enhancers. Motif discovery in
differentially accessible chromatin regions suggested a previously unknown role
for the Zic family of transcription factors in CGN maturation. We confirmed the
association of Zic with these elements by ChIP-seq and found, using knockdown,
that Zic1 and Zic2 are required for coordinating mature neuronal gene expression 
patterns. Together, our data reveal chromatin dynamics at thousands of gene
regulatory elements that facilitate the gene expression patterns necessary for
neuronal differentiation and function.

PMCID: PMC4414887
PMID: 25849986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cell. 2015 Feb 19;57(4):685-94. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.007.

Zic2 is an enhancer-binding factor required for embryonic stem cell
specification.

Luo Z(1), Gao X(1), Lin C(1), Smith ER(2), Marshall SA(1), Swanson SK(1), Florens
L(1), Washburn MP(3), Shilatifard A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50(th) Street, Kansas City, 
MO 64110, USA. (2)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50(th)
Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 320 East Superior
Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (3)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000
East 50(th) Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA; Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, 
USA. (4)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50(th) Street, Kansas
City, MO 64110, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 320 East Superior Street, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: ash@northwestern.edu.

The Zinc-finger protein of the cerebellum 2 (Zic2) is one of the vertebrate
homologs of the Drosophila pair-rule gene odd-paired (opa). Our molecular and
biochemical studies demonstrate that Zic2 preferentially binds to transcriptional
enhancers and is required for the regulation of gene expression in embryonic stem
cells. Detailed genome-wide and molecular studies reveal that Zic2 can function
with Mbd3/NuRD in regulating the chromatin state and transcriptional output of
genes linked to differentiation. Zic2 is required for proper differentiation of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), similar to what has been previously reported for
Mbd3/NuRD. Our study identifies Zic2 as a key factor in the execution of
transcriptional fine-tuning with Mbd3/NuRD in ESCs through interactions with
enhancers. Our study also points to the role of the Zic family of proteins as
enhancer-specific binding factors functioning in development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25699711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Med Hypotheses. 2015 Apr;84(4):402-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.01.026. Epub 2015 
Jan 28.

Teneurins and Alzheimer's disease: a suggestive role for a unique family of
proteins.

Bastías-Candia S(1), Braidy N(2), Zolezzi JM(3), Inestrosa NC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Celular y Molecular, Departamento de Biología,
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile. Electronic address: 
sbastiasc@uta.cl. (2)Centre for Healthy Brain Ageing, School of Psychiatry, UNSW 
Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
(3)Laboratorio de Biología Celular y Molecular, Departamento de Biología,
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile. (4)Centre for
Healthy Brain Ageing, School of Psychiatry, UNSW Medicine, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia; Centro de Envejecimiento y Regeneración
(CARE), Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Centro de 
Excelencia en Biomedicina de Magallanes (CEBIMA), Universidad de Magallanes,
Punta Arenas, Chile. Electronic address: ninestrosa@bio.puc.cl.

Alzheimer's disease is a debilitating age-related disorder characterized by
distinct pathological hallmarks, such as progressive memory loss and cognitive
impairment. During the last few years, several cellular signaling pathways have
been associated with the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, such as Notch, mTOR
and Wnt. However, the potential factors that modulate these pathways and novel
molecular mechanisms that might account for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's
disease or for therapy against this disease are still matters of intense
research. Teneurins are members of a unique protein system that has recently been
proposed as a novel and highly conserved regulatory signaling system in the
vertebrate brain, so far related with neurite outgrowth and neuronal matching.
The similitude in structure and function of teneurins with other cellular
signaling pathways, suggests that they may play a critical role in Alzheimer's
disease, either through the modulation of transcription factors due to the
nuclear translocation of the teneurins intracellular domain, or through the
activity of the corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF)-like peptide sequence,
called teneurin C-terminal associated peptide. Moreover, the presence of
Ca(2+)-binding motifs within teneurins structure and the Zic2-mediated
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling modulation, allows hypothesize a potential crosslink
between teneurins and the Wnt signaling pathway, particularly. Herein, we aim to 
highlight the main characteristics of teneurins and propose, based on current
knowledge of this family of proteins, an interesting review of their potential
involvement in Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25665860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Jan 13;56(2):722-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-14880.

Evaluation of 12 myopia-associated genes in Chinese patients with high myopia.

Li J(1), Jiang D(1), Xiao X(1), Li S(1), Jia X(1), Sun W(1), Guo X(1), Zhang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Two recent large-scale genome-wide association studies identified
significant associations between myopia and single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) near the PRSS56, BMP3, KCNQ5, LAMA2, TOX, TJP2, RDH5, ZIC2, RASGRF1, GJD2,
RBFOX1, and SHISA6 genes. Our study is to examine whether rare variants in these 
genes contribute to high myopia.
METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing was performed on samples of 298 probands with
early-onset high myopia (eoHM; spherical refraction in each meridian = -6.00
[diopters] D in both eyes; age of onset < 7 years) and 195 controls (different
forms of retinal degeneration including Leber congenital amaurosis, cone-rod
dystrophy, and familial exudative vitroretinopathy). Potential variations in
these genes were selected for further validation and comparison to the controls. 
Moreover, Sanger sequencing was used to evaluate the coding regions and the
upstream 800 bps of GJD2 in 395 additional subjects with late-onset moderate to
high myopia (loMHM; spherical refraction in each meridian = -4.00 D; age of onset
= 7 years) and 403 healthy controls (-0.50 D ± 1.00 D).
RESULTS: Exome sequencing of the 298 probands with eoHM identified 25 rare
variants that were predicted to affect coding residues. The segregation analysis 
and the distribution of rare variants between patients and controls did not
provide evidence to support their involvement in myopia. Sanger sequencing of
GJD2 in an additional 395 subjects with loMHM and 403 healthy controls did not
identify myopia-associated variants.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find evidence to support the association of myopia with
rare variants in these genes, probably due to our limited sample size. Additional
studies are expected to validate these results.

Copyright 2015 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMID: 25587058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Brain Dev. 2015 Aug;37(7):714-8. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2014.10.009. Epub 2014
Nov 8.

Holoprosencephaly with cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in 13q deletion syndrome:
Critical region for cerebellar dysgenesis within 13q32.2q34.

Mimaki M(1), Shiihara T(2), Watanabe M(2), Hirakata K(3), Sakazume S(4), Ishiguro
A(5), Shimojima K(6), Yamamoto T(6), Oka A(5), Mizuguchi M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: mimaki-tky@umin.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Neurology, Gunma Children's Medical Center, Japan. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, Gunma Children's Medical Center, Japan. (4)Clinical Genetics
Center, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Japan. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Japan. (6)Tokyo
Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Japan; Developmental Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Japan.

We describe two unrelated patients with terminal deletions in the long arm of
chromosome 13 showing brain malformation consisting of holoprosencephaly and
cerebellar vermis hypoplasia. Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis
revealed a pure terminal deletion of 13q31.3q34 in one patient and a mosaic ring 
chromosome with 13q32.2q34 deletion in the other. Mutations in ZIC2, located
within region 13q32, cause holoprosencephaly, whereas the 13q32.2q32.3 region is 
associated with cerebellar vermis hypoplasia (Dandy-Walker syndrome). The rare
concurrence of these major brain malformations in our patients provides further
evidence that 13q32.2q32.3 deletion, harboring ZIC2 and ZIC5, leads to cerebellar
dysgenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25454392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Syndromol. 2014 Aug;5(5):245-50. doi: 10.1159/000358538. Epub 2014 Feb 19.

A novel (paternally inherited) duplication 13q31.3q32.3 in a 12-year-old patient 
with facial dysmorphism and developmental delay.

Atack E(1), Fairtlough H(2), Smith K(1), Balasubramanian M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK. (2)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield
Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, UK.

We report a 12-year-old boy referred to the Clinical Genetics service in view of 
facial dysmorphism, learning difficulties and autistic spectrum disorder. 60K
arrayCGH revealed an 8.2-Mb duplication on chromosome 13q31.3q32.3, which was
paternally inherited. This specific duplication on chromosome 13 has not been
previously reported in the medical literature, and there are no familial or de
novo patients with the same duplication breakpoints. This region contains 24 OMIM
genes, including the glypicans GPC5 and GPC6, and the ZIC2 gene. We discuss the
relevance of this chromosome imbalance and discuss the impact of this duplication
on our patient's phenotype. Given that the duplication on 13q was paternally
inherited, and although initially thought to be of uncertain significance, on
exploring the family history further, it became apparent that the father had
learning difficulties as a child and previous surgery for congenital
diaphragmatic hernia. Here we explore the phenotype in association with this
novel duplication on chromosome 13q and add to the existing literature on array
findings within this region.

PMCID: PMC4188164
PMID: 25337073  [PubMed]


16. Dev Dyn. 2014 Nov;243(11):1487-98. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24186. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

The role of Zic genes in inner ear development in the mouse: Exploring mutant
mouse phenotypes.

Chervenak AP(1), Bank LM, Thomsen N, Glanville-Jones HC, Jonathan S, Millen KJ,
Arkell RM, Barald KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Murine Zic genes (Zic1-5) are expressed in the dorsal hindbrain and
in periotic mesenchyme (POM) adjacent to the developing inner ear. Zic genes are 
involved in developmental signaling pathways in many organ systems, including the
ear, although their exact roles haven't been fully elucidated. This report
examines the role of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic4 during inner ear development in mouse
mutants in which these Zic genes are affected.
RESULTS: Zic1/Zic4 double mutants don't exhibit any apparent defects in inner ear
morphology. By contrast, inner ears from Zic2(kd/kd) and Zic2(Ku/Ku) mutants have
severe but variable morphological defects in endolymphatic duct/sac and
semicircular canal formation and in cochlear extension in the inner ear. Analysis
of otocyst patterning in the Zic2(Ku/Ku) mutants by in situ hybridization showed 
changes in the expression patterns of Gbx2 and Pax2.
CONCLUSIONS: The experiments provide the first genetic evidence that the Zic
genes are required for morphogenesis of the inner ear. Zic2 loss-of-function
doesn't prevent initial otocyst patterning but leads to molecular abnormalities
concomitant with morphogenesis of the endolymphatic duct. Functional hearing
deficits often accompany inner ear dysmorphologies, making Zic2 a novel candidate
gene for ongoing efforts to identify the genetic basis of human hearing loss.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4206579
PMID: 25178196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Jun 5;14(6):838-53. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.04.003.

Reorganization of enhancer patterns in transition from naive to primed
pluripotency.

Buecker C(1), Srinivasan R(1), Wu Z(2), Calo E(1), Acampora D(3), Faial T(1),
Simeone A(3), Tan M(2), Swigut T(4), Wysocka J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (2)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research,
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
201203, China. (3)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "Adriano
Buzzati-Traverso," CNR, Via P. Castellino, 111, 80131 Naples, Italy; IRCCS
Neuromed, 86077 Pozzilli (IS), Italy. (4)Department of Chemical and Systems
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Electronic address: swigut@stanford.edu. (5)Department of Chemical and Systems
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;
Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: wysocka@stanford.edu.

Naive and primed pluripotency is characterized by distinct signaling
requirements, transcriptomes, and developmental properties, but both cellular
states share key transcriptional regulators: Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog. Here, we
demonstrate that transition between these two pluripotent states is associated
with widespread Oct4 relocalization, mirrored by global rearrangement of enhancer
chromatin landscapes. Our genomic and biochemical analyses identified candidate
mediators of primed state-specific Oct4 binding, including Otx2 and Zic2/3. Even 
when differentiation cues are blocked, premature Otx2 overexpression is
sufficient to exit the naive state, induce transcription of a substantial subset 
of primed pluripotency-associated genes, and redirect Oct4 to previously
inaccessible enhancer sites. However, the ability of Otx2 to engage new enhancer 
regions is determined by its levels, cis-encoded properties of the sites, and the
signaling environment. Our results illuminate regulatory mechanisms underlying
pluripotency and suggest that the capacity of transcription factors such as Otx2 
and Oct4 to pioneer new enhancer sites is highly context dependent.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4491504
PMID: 24905168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Sep;164A(9):2356-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36621. Epub 2014
May 28.

Novel de novo heterozygous FGFR1 mutation in two siblings with Hartsfield
syndrome: a case of gonadal mosaicism.

Dhamija R(1), Kirmani S, Wang X, Ferber MJ, Wieben ED, Lazaridis KN,
Babovic-Vuksanovic D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Hartsfield syndrome has been recently reported to be associated with mutations in
FGFR1 however, to this date; no familial cases have been reported. In this
report, we describe two siblings with Hartsfield syndrome and a novel de novo
FGFR1 mutation suggesting gonadal mosaicism. The proband presented at our
institution at age 6 years with a clinical diagnosis of Hartsfield syndrome and
requesting further genetic evaluation. Previous studies included a normal
karyotype, oligonucleotide array, and single gene testing for nonsyndromic
holoprosencephaly (SHH, SIX3, ZIC2, TGIF). At the age of 6 years, exome
sequencing was performed and a de novo novel missense variant was identified in
FGFR1 (coding for fibroblast growth factor-1) on chromosome 8p12: c.1880G>C
(p.R627T). Subsequently, a younger sibling was born with the same phenotype
(holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly of bilateral hands and feet and bilateral cleft 
lip and palate). Targeted sequencing of FGFR1 revealed the identical variant that
was previously identified in the proband. To our knowledge this observation is
the first documentation of familial recurrence of Hartsfield syndrome. As both
parents were negative for the sequence variant in FGFR1 gene by testing
peripheral blood samples, this suggests gonadal mosaicism. The frequency of
gonadal mosaicism in Hartsfield syndrome is not known however given our case,
this possibility should be taken in to consideration for recurrence risk
estimation in children of clinically unaffected parents.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24888332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Neural Dev. 2014 May 18;9:11. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-9-11.

Delayed neurogenesis leads to altered specification of ventrotemporal retinal
ganglion cells in albino mice.

Bhansali P, Rayport I, Rebsam A, Mason C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, USA. cam4@columbia.edu.

BACKGROUND: Proper binocular vision depends on the routing at the optic chiasm of
the correct proportion of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons that project to the
same (ipsilateral) and opposite (contralateral) side of the brain. The
ipsilateral RGC projection is reduced in mammals with albinism, a congenital
disorder characterized by deficient pigmentation in the skin, hair, and eyes.
Compared to the pigmented embryonic mouse retina, the albino embryonic mouse
retina has fewer RGCs that express the zinc-finger transcription factor, Zic2,
which is transiently expressed by RGCs fated to project ipsilaterally. Here,
using Zic2 as a marker of ipsilateral RGCs, Islet2 as a marker of contralateral
RGCs, and birthdating, we investigate spatiotemporal dynamics of RGC production
as they relate to the phenotype of diminished ipsilateral RGC number in the
albino retina.
RESULTS: At embryonic day (E)15.5, fewer Zic2-positive (Zic2+) RGCs are found in 
the albino ventrotemporal (VT) retina compared with the pigmented VT retina, as
we previously reported. However, the reduction in Zic2+ RGCs in the albino is not
accompanied by a compensatory increase in Zic2-negative (Zic2-) RGCs, resulting
in fewer RGCs in the VT retina at this time point. At E17.5, however, the number 
of RGCs in the VT region is similar in pigmented and albino retinae, implicating 
a shift in the timing of RGC production in the albino. Short-term birthdating
assays reveal a delay in RGC production in the albino VT retina between E13 and
E15. Specifically, fewer Zic2+ RGCs are born at E13 and more Zic2- RGCs are born 
at E15. Consistent with an increase in the production of Zic2- RGCs born at later
ages, more RGCs at E17.5 express the contralateral marker, Islet2, in the albino 
VT retina compared with the pigmented retina.
CONCLUSIONS: A delay in neurogenesis in the albino retina is linked to the
alteration of RGC subtype specification and consequently leads to the reduced
ipsilateral projection that characterizes albinism.

PMCID: PMC4072486
PMID: 24885435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1839(7):546-58. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.04.023.
Epub 2014 May 9.

Induction and dorsal restriction of Paired-box 3 (Pax3) gene expression in the
caudal neuroectoderm is mediated by integration of multiple pathways on a short
neural crest enhancer.

Sanchez-Ferras O(1), Bernas G(1), Laberge-Perrault E(1), Pilon N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics of Development Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences and BioMed Research Center, Faculty of Sciences, University of Quebec at
Montreal (UQAM), Canada. (2)Molecular Genetics of Development Laboratory,
Department of Biological Sciences and BioMed Research Center, Faculty of
Sciences, University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM), Canada. Electronic address:
pilon.nicolas@uqam.ca.

Pax3 encodes a paired-box transcription factor with key roles in neural crest and
neural tube ontogenesis. Robust control of Pax3 neural expression is ensured by
two redundant sets of cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) that integrate
anterior-posterior (such as Wnt-ßCatenin signaling) as well as dorsal-ventral
(such as Shh-Gli signaling) instructive cues. In previous work, we sought to
characterize the Wnt-mediated regulation of Pax3 expression and identified the
Cdx transcription factors (Cdx1/2/4) as critical intermediates in this process.
We identified the neural crest enhancer-2 (NCE2) from the 5'-flanking region of
Pax3 as a Cdx-dependent CRM that recapitulates the restricted expression of Pax3 
in the mouse caudal neuroectoderm. While this is consistent with a key role in
relaying the inductive signal from posteriorizing Wnt ligands, the broad
expression of Cdx proteins in the tailbud region is not consistent with the
restricted activity of NCE2. This implies that other positive and/or negative
inputs are required and, here, we report a novel role for the transcription
factor Zic2 in this regulation. Our data strongly suggests that Zic2 is involved 
in the induction (as a direct Pax3NCE2 activator and Cdx neural cofactor) as well
as the maintenance of Pax3 dorsal restriction (as a target of the ventral Shh
repressive input). We also provide evidence that the inductive Cdx-Zic2
interaction is integrated on NCE2 with a positive input from the neural-specific 
transcription factor Sox2. Altogether, our data provide important mechanistic
insights into the coordinated integration of different signaling pathways on a
short Pax3 CRM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24815547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Genet Mol Biol. 2014 Mar;37(1 Suppl):250-62.

Molecular analysis of holoprosencephaly in South America.

Savastano CP(1), El-Jaick KB(2), Costa-Lima MA(3), Abath CM(4), Bianca S(5),
Cavalcanti DP(6), Félix TM(7), Scarano G(8), Llerena JC Jr(9), Vargas FR(10),
Moreira MÂ(11), Seuánez HN(11), Castilla EE(12), Orioli IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Estudo Colaborativo Latino Americano de Malformações Congênitas, Departamento 
de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil .
; Instituto Nacional de Genética Médica Populacional, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 
. (2)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do
Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil . (3)Departamento de
Genética, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil . 
(4)Maternidade Cândida Vargas, Instituto Cândida Vargas, João Pessoa, PB, Brazil 
. (5)Centro di Consulenza Genetica e di Teratologia della Riproduzione,
Dipartimento Materno Infantile, ARNAS Garibaldi Nesima, Catania, CT, Italy .
(6)Departamento de Genética Médica, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, 
SP, Brazil . (7)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital das Clínicas de Porto
Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil . (8)Registro Campano Difetti Congeniti, Azienda
Ospedaliera "Gaetano Rummo", Benevento, BN, Italy . (9)Centro de Genética Médica,
Instituto Fernandes Figueira, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil .
(10)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Estado
do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil . ; Estudo Colaborativo Latino
Americano de Malformações Congênitas, Laboratório de Epidemiologia de Defeitos
Congênitos, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil . (11)Programa de Genética, Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, 
RJ, Brazil . (12)Instituto Nacional de Genética Médica Populacional, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil . ; Estudio Colaborativo Latino Americano de Malformaciones
Congenitas, Centro de Educación Médica e Investigación Clínica, Buenos Aires,
Argentina .

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a spectrum of brain and facial malformations primarily
reflecting genetic factors, such as chromosomal abnormalities and gene mutations.
Here, we present a clinical and molecular analysis of 195 probands with HPE or
microforms; approximately 72% of the patients were derived from the Latin
American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations (ECLAMC), and 82% of the
patients were newborns. Alobar HPE was the predominant brain defect in almost all
facial defect categories, except for patients without oral cleft and median or
lateral oral clefts. Ethmocephaly, cebocephaly, and premaxillary agenesis were
primarily observed among female patients. Premaxillary agenesis occurred in six
of the nine diabetic mothers. Recurrence of HPE or microform was approximately
19%. The frequency of microdeletions, detected using Multiplex Ligation-dependant
Probe Amplification (MLPA) was 17% in patients with a normal karyotype.
Cytogenetics or QF-PCR analyses revealed chromosomal anomalies in 27% of the
probands. Mutational analyses in genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF were performed in
119 patients, revealing eight mutations in SHH, two mutations in SIX3 and two
mutations in ZIC2. Thus, a detailed clinical description of new HPE cases with
identified genetic anomalies might establish genotypic and phenotypic
correlations and contribute to the development of additional strategies for the
analysis of new cases.

PMCID: PMC3983586
PMID: 24764759  [PubMed]


22. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jul;27(7-8):777-81. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0449.

Holoprosencephaly: ZIC2 mutation in a case with panhypopituitarism.

Tasdemir S, Sahin I, Cayir A, Doneray H, Solomon BD, Muenke M, Yuce I, Tatar A.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common malformation of the brain,
results from failed or incomplete separation of the embryonic forebrain
(prosencephalon). HPE occurs in approximately 1 in 250 embryos and in about 1 in 
10,000 births. It is etiologically heterogeneous, and may be caused by
cytogenetic anomalies and teratogenic influences; it occurs as part of a
syndrome, or due to heterozygous mutations in 1 of over 10 HPE-associated genes. 
ZIC2 mutations are the second-most common cause of non-syndromic non-chromosomal 
HPE (after sonic hedgehog) and occur de novo in 74% of the affected probands.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to describe the first case of
ZIC2-related HPE with both anterior and posterior pituitary insufficiencies.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report about a 2-year-8-month-old boy who was born as a
second child in a non-consanguineous healthy Turkish family. He has the
characteristic ZIC2 phenotype: bitemporal narrowing, upslanting palpebral
fissures, large ears, short nose with anteverted nares and broad and deep
philtrum. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed alobar HPE. During laboratory
investigation, his blood sodium level was 158 mmol/L and the specific gravity of 
his urine was 1.002. Serum osmolarity was 336 mOsm/L and urine osmolality was 135
mOsm/kg. His FT4 was 0.8 ng/dL and TSH was 0.79 mLU/mL. Response to vasopressin
confirmed the diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus and TRH-stimulating test
supported the central hypothyroidism. A frameshift mutation
(NM_007129.2:c1091_1092 del, p.Gln364Leufs*2) in the ZIC2 gene was detected.
CONCLUSION: Pituitary insufficiency other than isolated diabetes insipidus is a
rare finding of HPE, and occurs most frequently in patients with GLI2 mutations
(the phenotype of which typically does not include frank neuroanatomic anomalies 
such as HPE); ours is the only described patient with a ZIC2 mutation and both
anterior and posterior pituitary dysfunction.

PMID: 24706429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2014 Apr;100(4):300-6. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23216. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Rare nasal cleft in a patient with holoprosencephaly due to a mutation in the
ZIC2 gene.

Savastano CP(1), Bernardi P, Seuánez HN, Moreira MÂ, Orioli IM.

Author information: 
(1)Estudo Colaborativo Latino Americano de Malformações Congênitas (ECLAMC),
Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; INAGEMP
- Instituto Nacional de Genética Médica Populacional, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a spectrum of midline malformations of the
prosencephalon generally reflected in a continuum of midline facial anomalies.
Patients with mutation in the ZIC2 gene usually present a normal or mildly
dysmorphic face associated with a severe brain malformation. Here we present a
rare unilateral nasal cleft (Tessier cleft n. 1) with holoprosencephaly in a
patient with a ZIC2 mutation.
CASE: The male newborn presented with alobar HPE, microcephaly, ocular
hypertelorism, upslanting palpebral fissures, a bulky nose with a left paramedian
alar cleft. Mutational screening for HPE genes revealed the occurrence of a
frameshift mutation in the ZIC2 gene. The mutation was inherited from the father 
who presented only mild ocular hypotelorism but had an affected child with HPE
from his first marriage.
CONCLUSION: The occurrence of oral clefts is common in patients with HPE, but
unusual in patients with mutation in the ZIC2 gene. To our knowledge, clefts of
the nasal alae have been reported only once or twice in patients with ZIC2
mutations. In documented patients from the literature, only 2% of individuals
with described pathogenic mutations in the ZIC2 gene (3/171) presented facial
clefts, one of them a nasal cleft, while common oral clefts were observed in 27% 
of individuals (7/26) described with nonpathogenic ZIC2 mutations or presenting a
concomitant mutation in another HPE gene. When compared with the general
population, nasal clefts are common in ZIC2 mutations and these mutations must be
searched for in undiagnosed cases.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24677696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genesis. 2014 Jun;52(6):626-35. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22767. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

The Zic2 gene directs the formation and function of node cilia to control cardiac
situs.

Barratt KS(1), Glanville-Jones HC, Arkell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Early Mammalian Development Laboratory, Research School of Biology, Evolution,
Ecology and Genetics, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200,
Australia.

The first molecular herald of organ asymmetry during murine embryogenesis is
found at the periphery of the node in early-somite stage embryos. Asymmetric gene
expression and calcium accumulation at the node occurs in response to a left-ward
flow of extracellular fluid across the node, generated by motile cilia within the
pit of the node and likely sensed by immotile cilia in the periphery of the node.
The ciliation of node cells is controlled by a cascade of node-restricted
transcription factor activity during mid-late gastrulation. Mutation of the
murine Zic2 transcription factor is associated with random cardiac situs and a
loss of asymmetric gene expression at the early-somite node and in the lateral
plate. Zic2 is not expressed in these regions but is transiently expressed in the
mid-late gastrula node at the time of ciliogenesis. The cilia of the node are
overtly abnormal in Zic2 mutant embryos being dysmorphic and short relative to
wild-type littermates. The expression of the Noto, Rfx3, and Foxj1 transcription 
factors known to regulate ciliogenesis is greatly depleted in the mid-gastrula
node of mutants, as is the expression of the Pkd1l1 gene required for cilia
function. Zic2 appears to be a component of the gene regulatory network that
drives ciliation of node cells during gastrulation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24585447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Prenat Diagn. 2014 Apr;34(4):402-5. doi: 10.1002/pd.4312. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Detecting fetal subchromosomal aberrations by MPS: an unexpected discrepancy
between amniocyte DNA and ccffDNA.

Buysse K(1), de Ligt J, Janssen IM, van Bon BW, Gomes I, Hehir-Kwa J, Eggink AJ, 
van Vugt JM, Vissers LE, Geurts van Kessel A, Faas BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.

PMID: 24391091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Neuron. 2013 Dec 18;80(6):1407-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.006.

EphrinB3/EphA4-mediated guidance of ascending and descending spinal tracts.

Paixão S(1), Balijepalli A(1), Serradj N(2), Niu J(3), Luo W(3), Martin JH(2),
Klein R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department 'Molecules - Signals - Development,' Max Planck Institute of
Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. (2)Department of
Physiology, Pharmacology, and Neuroscience, City College of the City University
of New York, New York, NY 10031, USA. (3)Department of Neuroscience, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Department 'Molecules - Signals - Development,' Max Planck Institute of
Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany; Munich Cluster for 
Systems Neurology (Synergy), 80336 Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
rklein@neuro.mpg.de.

The spinal cord contains many descending and ascending longitudinal tracts whose 
development appears to be controlled by distinct guidance systems. We identified 
a population of dorsal spinal neurons marked by coexpression of the transcription
factor Zic2 and the guidance receptor EphA4. Zic2+;EphA4+ neurons are surrounded 
by mechanosensory terminals, suggesting innervation by mechanoreceptor afferents.
Their axons form an ipsilateral ascending pathway that develops during
embryogenesis and projects within the ventral aspect of the dorsal funiculus, the
same location as the descending corticospinal tract (CST), which develops
postnatally. Interestingly, the same guidance mechanism, namely, ephrinB3-induced
EphA4 forward signaling, is required for the guidance of both ascending and
descending axon tracts. Our analysis of conditional EphA4 mutant mice also
revealed that the development of the dorsal funiculus occurs independently of
EphA4 expression in descending CST axons and is linked to the distribution of
Zic2+;EphA4+ spinal neurons and the formation of the ascending pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4030410
PMID: 24360544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neuron. 2013 Dec 18;80(6):1392-406. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.007.

Zic2-dependent axon midline avoidance controls the formation of major ipsilateral
tracts in the CNS.

Escalante A(1), Murillo B(1), Morenilla-Palao C(1), Klar A(2), Herrera E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Miguel Hernández, CSIC-UMH), Campus San Juan, Av. Ramón y
Cajal s/n, Alicante 03550, Spain. (2)Department of Medical Neurobiology, IMRIC,
Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel. (3)Instituto 
de Neurociencias de Alicante (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Miguel Hernández, CSIC-UMH), Campus San Juan, Av. Ramón y
Cajal s/n, Alicante 03550, Spain. Electronic address: e.herrera@umh.es.

In bilaterally symmetric organisms, interhemispheric communication is essential
for sensory processing and motor coordination. The mechanisms that govern axon
midline crossing during development have been well studied, particularly at the
spinal cord. However, the molecular program that determines axonal ipsilaterality
remains poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that ipsilateral neurons whose
axons grow in close proximity to the midline, such as the ascending dorsospinal
tracts and the rostromedial thalamocortical projection, avoid midline crossing
because they transiently activate the transcription factor Zic2. In contrast,
uncrossed neurons whose axons never approach the midline control axonal
laterality by Zic2-independent mechanisms. Zic2 induces EphA4 expression in
dorsospinal neurons to prevent midline crossing while Robo3 is downregulated to
ensure that axons enter the dorsal tracts instead of growing ventrally. Together 
with previous reports, our data reveal a critical role for Zic2 as a determinant 
of axon midline avoidance in the CNS across species and pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24360543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Nov 13;54(12):7492-7. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-12825.

Association between ZIC2, RASGRF1, and SHISA6 genes and high myopia in Japanese
subjects.

Oishi M(1), Yamashiro K, Miyake M, Akagi-Kurashige Y, Kumagai K, Nakata I,
Nakanishi H, Yoshikawa M, Oishi A, Gotoh N, Tsujikawa A; Nagahama Study Group,
Yamada R, Matsuda F, Yoshimura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

PURPOSE: We investigated the association of genetic variations, which were
identified recently in a large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) to
confer risk of refractive error and common myopia in Caucasians, with high myopia
in Japanese subjects.
METHODS: The 5 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the 5 genes TOX, RDH5,
ZIC2, RASGRF1, and SHISA6, were genotyped in 1339 unrelated highly myopic
Japanese patients and 3248 healthy Japanese participants in the Nagahama Study.
In addition, genotypes were compared between high myopia patients without
choroidal neovascularization (CNV) and patients with myopic CNV.
RESULTS: Significant associations between rs8000973 near ZIC2 (P = 7.16 ×
10(-7)), rs4778879 in RASGRF1 (P = 3.40 × 10(-7)), and rs2969180 in SHISA6 (P =
0.033) and high myopia were observed. Odds ratios (95% confidence intervals) were
1.33 (1.19-1.49), 0.78 (0.71-0.86), and 1.11 (1.01-1.22) for the rs8000973 C
allele, rs4778879 A allele, and rs2969180 G allele, respectively. The effect of
the rs2969180 allele G contrasted with that observed in the original report,
whereas the effect of the other 2 SNPs agreed. Further analysis using controls
with -1.0 diopter (D) = spherical equivalent = +1.0 D showed a significant
association between ZIC2 and RASGRF1, but not SHISA6. Among the patients with
high myopia, 516 had myopic CNV in either eye, while 823 patients did not have
myopic CNV in eyes. No evaluated genes showed a significant association with the 
development of myopic CNV.
CONCLUSIONS: ZIC2 and RASGRF1 are susceptibility genes, not only for common
myopia, but also for high myopia.

PMID: 24150758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Comput Biol Chem. 2013 Dec;47:192-7. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.010.
Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Gene expression patterns combined with bioinformatics analysis identify genes
associated with cholangiocarcinoma.

Li C(1), Shen W, Shen S, Ai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital Affiliated in Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

To explore the molecular mechanisms of cholangiocarcinoma (CC), microarray
technology was used to find biomarkers for early detection and diagnosis. The
gene expression profiles from 6 patients with CC and 5 normal controls were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus and compared. As a result, 204
differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) in CC patients compared to normal
controls were identified using a computational bioinformatics analysis. These
genes were mainly involved in coenzyme metabolic process, peptidase activity and 
oxidation reduction. A regulatory network was constructed by mapping the DCGs to 
known regulation data. Four transcription factors, FOXC1, ZIC2, NKX2-2 and GCGR, 
were hub nodes in the network. In conclusion, this study provides a set of
targets useful for future investigations into molecular biomarker studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Neurosci. 2013 Jul 24;33(30):12490-509. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4708-12.2013.

Ten-m2 is required for the generation of binocular visual circuits.

Young TR(1), Bourke M, Zhou X, Oohashi T, Sawatari A, Fässler R, Leamey CA.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Physiology, School of Medical Sciences and Bosch Institute,
University of Sydney, New South Wales, 2006 Australia.

Functional binocular vision requires that inputs arising from the two retinae are
integrated and precisely organized within central visual areas. Previous studies 
have demonstrated an important role for one member of the Ten-m/Odz/teneurin
family, Ten-m3, in the mapping of ipsilateral retinal projections. Here, we have 
identified a distinct role for another closely related family member, Ten-m2, in 
the formation of the ipsilateral projection in the mouse visual system. Ten-m2
expression was observed in the retina, dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN), 
superior colliculus (SC), and primary visual cortex (V1) of the developing mouse.
Anterograde and retrograde tracing experiments in Ten-m2 knock-out (KO) mice
revealed a specific decrease in ipsilateral retinal ganglion cells projecting to 
dLGN and SC. This reduction was most prominent in regions corresponding to
ventral retina. No change in the topography of ipsilateral or contralateral
projections was observed. While expression of a critical ipsilateral fate
determinant, Zic2, appeared unaltered, a notable reduction in one of its
downstream targets, EphB1, was observed in ventral retina, suggesting that Ten-m2
may interact with this molecular pathway. Immunohistochemistry for c-fos, a
neural activity marker, revealed that the area of V1 driven by ipsilateral inputs
was reduced in KOs, while the ratio of ipsilateral-to-contralateral responses
contributing to binocular activation during visually evoked potential recordings 
was also diminished. Finally, a novel two-alternative swim task revealed specific
deficits associated with dorsal visual field. These data demonstrate a
requirement for Ten-m2 in the establishment of ipsilateral projections, and thus 
the generation of binocular circuits, critical for mammalian visual function.

PMID: 23884953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Neurosci. 2013 May 15;33(20):8596-607. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2083-12.2013.

Shh/Boc signaling is required for sustained generation of ipsilateral projecting 
ganglion cells in the mouse retina.

Sánchez-Arrones L(1), Nieto-Lopez F, Sánchez-Camacho C, Carreres MI, Herrera E,
Okada A, Bovolenta P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid 28049, Spain.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling is an important determinant of vertebrate retinal 
ganglion cell (RGC) development. In mice, there are two major RGC populations:
(1) the Islet2-expressing contralateral projecting (c)RGCs, which both produce
and respond to Shh; and (2) the Zic2-expressing ipsilateral projecting RGCs
(iRGCs), which lack Shh expression. In contrast to cRGCs, iRGCs, which are
generated in the ventrotemporal crescent (VTC) of the retina, specifically
express Boc, a cell adhesion molecule that acts as a high-affinity receptor for
Shh. In Boc(-/-) mutant mice, the ipsilateral projection is significantly
decreased. Here, we demonstrate that this phenotype results, at least in part,
from the misspecification of a proportion of iRGCs. In Boc(-/-) VTC, the number
of Zic2-positive RGCs is reduced, whereas more Islet2/Shh-positive RGCs are
observed, a phenotype also detected in Zic2 and Foxd1 null embryos. Consistent
with this observation, organization of retinal projections at the dorsal lateral 
geniculate nucleus is altered in Boc(-/-) mice. Analyses of the molecular and
cellular consequences of introducing Shh into the developing VTC and Zic2 and Boc
into the central retina indicate that Boc expression alone is insufficient to
fully activate the ipsilateral program and that Zic2 regulates Shh expression.
Taking these data together, we propose that expression of Boc in cells from the
VTC is required to sustain Zic2 expression, likely by regulating the levels of
Shh signaling from the nearby cRGCs. Zic2, in turn, directly or indirectly,
counteracts Shh and Islet2 expression in the VTC and activates the ipsilateral
program.

PMCID: PMC3827538
PMID: 23678105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 1;380(1):73-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.033. Epub 2013
May 8.

Zebrafish Zic2a and Zic2b regulate neural crest and craniofacial development.

Teslaa JJ(1), Keller AN, Nyholm MK, Grinblat Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common malformation of the human forebrain, is 
associated with defects of the craniofacial skeleton. ZIC2, a zinc-finger
transcription factor, is strongly linked to HPE and to a characteristic set of
dysmorphic facial features in humans. We have previously identified important
functions for zebrafish Zic2 in the developing forebrain. Here, we demonstrate
that ZIC2 orthologs zic2a and zic2b also regulate the forming zebrafish
craniofacial skeleton, including the jaw and neurocranial cartilages, and use the
zebrafish to study Zic2-regulated processes that may contribute to the complex
etiology of HPE. Using temporally controlled Zic2a overexpression, we show that
the developing craniofacial cartilages are sensitive to Zic2 elevation prior to
24hpf. This window of sensitivity overlaps the critical expansion and migration
of the neural crest (NC) cells, which migrate from the developing neural tube to 
populate vertebrate craniofacial structures. We demonstrate that zic2b influences
the induction of NC at the neural plate border, while both zic2a and zic2b
regulate NC migratory onset and strongly contribute to chromatophore development.
Both Zic2 depletion and early ectopic Zic2 expression cause moderate,
incompletely penetrant mispatterning of the NC-derived jaw precursors at 24hpf,
yet by 2dpf these changes in Zic2 expression result in profoundly mispatterned
chondrogenic condensations. We attribute this discrepancy to an additional role
for Zic2a and Zic2b in patterning the forebrain primordium, an important
signaling source during craniofacial development. This hypothesis is supported by
evidence that transplanted Zic2-deficient cells can contribute to craniofacial
cartilages in a wild-type background. Collectively, these data suggest that
zebrafish Zic2 plays a dual role during craniofacial development, contributing to
two disparate aspects of craniofacial morphogenesis: (1) neural crest induction
and migration, and (2) early patterning of tissues adjacent to craniofacial
chondrogenic condensations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3886643
PMID: 23665173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Dyn. 2013 Jul;242(7):897-908. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23978. Epub 2013 May 30.

Spatiotemporal expression of Zic genes during vertebrate inner ear development.

Chervenak AP(1), Hakim IS, Barald KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inner ear development involves signaling from surrounding tissues,
including the adjacent hindbrain, periotic mesenchyme, and notochord. These
signals include SHH, FGFs, BMPs, and WNTs from the hindbrain and SHH from the
notochord. Zic genes, which are expressed in the dorsal neural tube and act
during neural development, have been implicated as effectors of these pathways.
This report examines whether Zic genes' involvement in inner ear development is a
tenable hypothesis based on their expression patterns.
RESULTS: In the developing inner ear of both the chick and mouse, all of the Zic 
genes were expressed in the dorsal neural tube and variably in the periotic
mesenchyme, but expression of the Zic genes in the otic epithelium was not found.
The onset of expression differed among the Zic genes; within any given region
surrounding the otic epithelium, multiple Zic genes were expressed in the same
place at the same time.
CONCLUSIONS: Zic gene expression in the region of the developing inner ear is
similar between mouse and chick. Zic expression domains overlap with sites of WNT
and SHH signaling during otocyst patterning, suggesting a role for Zic genes in
modulating signaling from these pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3771324
PMID: 23606270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060216. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Site specific mutation of the Zic2 locus by microinjection of TALEN mRNA in mouse
CD1, C3H and C57BL/6J oocytes.

Davies B(1), Davies G, Preece C, Puliyadi R, Szumska D, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. ben.davies@well.ox.ac.uk

Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases (TALENs) consist of a nuclease
domain fused to a DNA binding domain which is engineered to bind to any genomic
sequence. These chimeric enzymes can be used to introduce a double strand break
at a specific genomic site which then can become the substrate for error-prone
non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), generating mutations at the site of cleavage. 
In this report we investigate the feasibility of achieving targeted mutagenesis
by microinjection of TALEN mRNA within the mouse oocyte. We achieved high rates
of mutagenesis of the mouse Zic2 gene in all backgrounds examined including
outbred CD1 and inbred C3H and C57BL/6J. Founder mutant Zic2 mice (eight
independent alleles, with frameshift and deletion mutations) were created in C3H 
and C57BL/6J backgrounds. These mice transmitted the mutant alleles to the
progeny with 100% efficiency, allowing the creation of inbred lines. Mutant mice 
display a curly tail phenotype consistent with Zic2 loss-of-function. The
efficiency of site-specific germline mutation in the mouse confirm TALEN mediated
mutagenesis in the oocyte to be a viable alternative to conventional gene
targeting in embryonic stem cells where simple loss-of-function alleles are
required. This technology enables allelic series of mutations to be generated
quickly and efficiently in diverse genetic backgrounds and will be a valuable
approach to rapidly create mutations in mice already bearing one or more mutant
alleles at other genetic loci without the need for lengthy backcrossing.

PMCID: PMC3610929
PMID: 23555929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 29;433(1):79-83. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.061. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Molecular analysis of the human SLC13A4 sulfate transporter gene promoter.

Jefferis J(1), Rakoczy J, Simmons DG, Dawson PA.

Author information: 
(1)Mater Medical Research Institute, South Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

The human solute linked carrier (SLC) 13A4 gene is primarily expressed in the
placenta where it is proposed to mediate the transport of nutrient sulfate from
mother to fetus. The molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of SLC13A4
expression remain unknown. To investigate the regulation of SLC13A4 gene
expression, we analysed the transcriptional activity of the human SLC13A4
5'-flanking region in the JEG-3 placental cell line using luciferase reporter
assays. Basal transcriptional activity was identified in the region -57 to -192
nucleotides upstream of the SLC13A4 transcription initiation site. Mutational
analysis of the minimal promoter region identified Nuclear factor Y (NFY),
Specificity protein 1 (SP1) and Krüppel like factor 7 (KLF7) motifs which
conferred positive transcriptional activity, as well as Zinc finger protein of
the cerebellum 2 (ZIC2) and helix-loop-helix protein 1 (HEN1) motifs that
repressed transcription. The conserved NFY, SP1, KLF7, ZIC2 and HEN1 motifs in
the SLC13A4 promoter of placental species but not in non-placental species,
suggests a potential role for these putative transcriptional factor binding
motifs in the physiological control of SLC13A4 mRNA expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003299. Epub 2013 Feb 
28.

Genome-wide analysis points to roles for extracellular matrix remodeling, the
visual cycle, and neuronal development in myopia.

Kiefer AK(1), Tung JY, Do CB, Hinds DA, Mountain JL, Francke U, Eriksson N.

Author information: 
(1)23andMe, Mountain View, California, United States of America.

Myopia, or nearsightedness, is the most common eye disorder, resulting primarily 
from excess elongation of the eye. The etiology of myopia, although known to be
complex, is poorly understood. Here we report the largest ever genome-wide
association study (45,771 participants) on myopia in Europeans. We performed a
survival analysis on age of myopia onset and identified 22 significant
associations ([Formula: see text]), two of which are replications of earlier
associations with refractive error. Ten of the 20 novel associations identified
replicate in a separate cohort of 8,323 participants who reported if they had
developed myopia before age 10. These 22 associations in total explain 2.9% of
the variance in myopia age of onset and point toward a number of different
mechanisms behind the development of myopia. One association is in the gene
PRSS56, which has previously been linked to abnormally small eyes; one is in a
gene that forms part of the extracellular matrix (LAMA2); two are in or near
genes involved in the regeneration of 11-cis-retinal (RGR and RDH5); two are near
genes known to be involved in the growth and guidance of retinal ganglion cells
(ZIC2, SFRP1); and five are in or near genes involved in neuronal signaling or
development. These novel findings point toward multiple genetic factors involved 
in the development of myopia and suggest that complex interactions between
extracellular matrix remodeling, neuronal development, and visual signals from
the retina may underlie the development of myopia in humans.

PMCID: PMC3585144
PMID: 23468642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Eur Spine J. 2013 Jun;22(6):1300-11. doi: 10.1007/s00586-013-2728-2. Epub 2013
Mar 7.

Microarray expression profiling identifies genes with altered expression in
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis.

Fendri K(1), Patten SA, Kaufman GN, Zaouter C, Parent S, Grimard G, Edery P,
Moldovan F.

Author information: 
(1)Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center, 3175, Chemin de la Cote
Ste-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1C5, Canada.

PURPOSE: Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) is considered a complex genetic
disease, in which malfunctioning or dysregulation of one or more genes has been
proposed to be responsible for the expressed phenotype. However, to date, no
disease causing genes has been identified and the pathogenesis of AIS remains
unknown. The aim of this study is, therefore, to identify specific molecules with
differing expression patterns in AIS compared to healthy individuals.
METHODS: Microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR have examined differences in
the gene transcription profile between primary osteoblasts derived from spinal
vertebrae of AIS patients and those of healthy individuals.
RESULTS: There are 145 genes differentially expressed in AIS osteoblasts. A
drastic and significant change has been noted particularly in the expression
levels of Homeobox genes (HOXB8, HOXB7, HOXA13, HOXA10), ZIC2, FAM101A, COMP and 
PITX1 in AIS compared to controls. Clustering analysis revealed the interaction
of these genes in biological pathways crucial for bone development, in particular
in the differentiation of skeletal elements and structural integrity of the
vertebrae.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports on the expression of molecules that have not been
described previously in AIS. We also provide for the first time gene interaction 
pathways in AIS pathogenesis. These genes are involved in various bone regulatory
and developmental pathways and many of them can be grouped into clusters to
participate in a particular biological pathway. Further studies can be built on
our findings to further elucidate the association between different biological
pathways and the pathogenesis of AIS.

PMCID: PMC3676547
PMID: 23467837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Oct;70(20):3791-811. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1285-5. Epub
2013 Feb 27.

The ZIC gene family encodes multi-functional proteins essential for patterning
and morphogenesis.

Houtmeyers R(1), Souopgui J, Tejpar S, Arkell R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, O&N1, 3000, Leuven,
Belgium, rob.houtmeyers@med.kuleuven.be.

The zinc finger of the cerebellum gene (ZIC) discovered in Drosophila
melanogaster (odd-paired) has five homologs in Xenopus, chicken, mice, and
humans, and seven in zebrafish. This pattern of gene copy expansion is
accompanied by a divergence in gene and protein structure, suggesting that Zic
family members share some, but not all, functions. ZIC genes are implicated in
neuroectodermal development and neural crest cell induction. All share conserved 
regions encoding zinc finger domains, however their heterogeneity and
specification remain unexplained. In this review, the evolution, structure, and
expression patterns of the ZIC homologs are described; specific functions
attributable to individual family members are supported. A review of data from
functional studies in Xenopus and murine models suggest that ZIC genes encode
multifunctional proteins operating in a context-specific manner to drive critical
events during embryogenesis. The identification of ZIC mutations in congenital
syndromes highlights the relevance of these genes in human development.

PMID: 23443491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2013 Jun;25(6):538-41. doi: 10.1111/nmo.12101. Epub
2013 Feb 17.

Zic2 is required for enteric nervous system development and neurite outgrowth: a 
mouse model of enteric hyperplasia and dysplasia.

Zhang Y(1), Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

From a forward genetic screen in mice we isolated a novel Zic2 allele with
abnormal aggregation of meconium in the gastrointestinal tract. Zic2(m1Nisw)
mutant embryos show an increase in the number of enteric neurons in vivo and
disorganization of the neurite network. Explant culture of Zic2(m1Nisw)
gastrointestinal tract show extensive neurite outgrowth, suggesting that Zic2 is 
a negative regulator of nerve fiber growth. These studies demonstrate a
previously unknown function of Zic2 and provide a novel animal model of enteric
nervous system dysplasia and hyperplasia.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3862053
PMID: 23413832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2012 Dec;51(4):630-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2012.09.021.

Alobar holoprosencephaly, cebocephaly, and micropenis in a Klinefelter fetus of a
diabetic mother.

Chen CP(1), Su TH, Chern SR, Su JW, Lee CC, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: Coexistence of Klinefelter syndrome and holoprosencephaly (HPE) is
rare. We report alobar HPE, cebocephaly, and micropenis in a Klinefelter fetus of
a mother with type 2 diabetes mellitus with obesity and poor metabolic control.
CASE REPORT: A 38-year-old woman was referred for therapy of type 2 diabetes
mellitus with poor glycemic control at 24 weeks of gestation. On examination, she
had a body height of 162 cm and a body weight of 105 kg. She had been treated
with oral medication for diabetes mellitus for 4 years with poor maternal
metabolic control. She had prominent glucosuria and glycemia. Her hemoglobin A1c 
was 7.5% (normal range: 3.4-6.1%), and the fasting glucose level was 141 mg/mL
(normal range: 70-99 mg/mL) during this visit. Her husband was 46 years old.
Prenatal ultrasound revealed a singleton fetus with fetal biometry equivalent to 
24 weeks, alobar HPE, cebocephaly, and micropenis. As a result of poor maternal
heath and fetal anomaly, the parents elected to terminate the pregnancy, and a
986-g male fetus was delivered with hypotelorism, HPE, cebocephaly, micropenis,
and cryptorchidism. Cytogenetic analysis of the cord blood revealed a karyotype
of 47,XXY. The parental karyotypes were normal. Polymorphic DNA analysis revealed
a paternal origin of the extra X chromosome. Molecular analysis of the HPE genes 
of SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF revealed no mutations.
CONCLUSION: Prenatal diagnosis of HPE should include a biochemical examination to
identify metabolic factors such as maternal diabetes, and preventive management
should be considered in subsequent pregnancies to achieve good control of
maternal diabetes.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23276570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Regen Med. 2013 Mar;8(2):125-44. doi: 10.2217/rme.12.117. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Seven diverse human embryonic stem cell-derived chondrogenic clonal embryonic
progenitor cell lines display site-specific cell fates.

Sternberg H(1), Kidd J, Murai JT, Jiang J, Rinon A, Erickson IE, Funk WD, Wang Q,
Chapman KB, Vangsness CT Jr, West MD.

Author information: 
(1)BioTime, Inc., 1301 Harbor Bay Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

AIM: The transcriptomes of seven diverse clonal human embryonic progenitor cell
lines with chondrogenic potential were compared with that of bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
MATERIALS & METHODS: The cell lines 4D20.8, 7PEND24, 7SMOO32, E15, MEL2, SK11 and
SM30 were compared with MSCs using immunohistochemical methods, gene expression
microarrays and quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In the undifferentiated progenitor state, each line displayed unique
combinations of site-specific markers, including AJAP1, ALDH1A2, BMP5, BARX1,
HAND2, HOXB2, LHX1, LHX8, PITX1, TBX15 and ZIC2, but none of the lines expressed 
the MSC marker CD74. The lines showed diverse responses when differentiated in
the presence of combinations of TGF-ß3, BMP2, 4, 6 and 7 and GDF5, with the lines
4D20.8, SK11, SM30 and MEL2 showing osteogenic markers in some differentiation
conditions. The line 7PEND24 showed evidence of regenerating articular cartilage 
and, in some conditions, markers of tendon differentiation.
CONCLUSION: The scalability of site-specific clonal human embryonic stem
cell-derived embryonic progenitor cell lines may provide novel models for the
study of differentiation and methods for preparing purified and identified cells 
types for use in therapy.

PMID: 23249126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Prenat Med. 2012 Jul;6(3):36-9.

Molecular prenatal diagnosis of a sporadic alobar holoprosencephalic fetus:
genotype-phenotype correlations.

Gekas J(1), Sergi C, Kamnasaran D.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Research Unit, Centre de recherche de l'Hôpital Saint-François 
d'Assise, Québec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: holoprosencephaly is the most common forebrain malformation syndrome
with a multifactorial etiology. Currently, mutations are identified in 5-10% of
non syndromic, non-chromosomal cases in at least 12 genes. We report the
molecular prenatal diagnosis of a fetus with alobar holoprosencephaly.
METHODS: CTG band karyotyping and array CGH genome-wide cytogenetic screenings
were done, in conjunction with DNA sequence analyses of the SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and
TGIF genes in search of a molecular etiology and with comparison of findings to
prior cases.
RESULTS: standard CTG band karyotyping and array CGH genome-wide screening failed
to identify plausible chromosome imbalances or structural anomalies. However,
extensive sequencing of the genomic DNA from the fetus and both parents on all
exon and exon-intron boundaries of the four most commonly mutated genes: SHH,
ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF, identified codon 100 of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) gene having
a hotspot for loss-of-function mutations in our case and others.
CONCLUSION: mutations in codon 100 of SHH were discovered in both sporadic and
autosomal dominant inherited cases with evidence of variable expressivity and
penetrance. Collectively, this study reinforces the complexity of
genotype-phenotype correlations in the prenatal diagnosis of holoprosencephalic
fetuses.

PMCID: PMC3503521
PMID: 23181171  [PubMed]


43. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e39026. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039026. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Unique alterations of an ultraconserved non-coding element in the 3'UTR of ZIC2
in holoprosencephaly.

Roessler E(1), Hu P, Hong SK, Srivastava K, Carrington B, Sood R, Petrykowska H, 
Elnitski L, Ribeiro LA, Richieri-Costa A, Feldman B, Odenwald WF, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI),
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Coding region alterations of ZIC2 are the second most common type of mutation in 
holoprosencephaly (HPE). Here we use several complementary bioinformatic
approaches to identify ultraconserved cis-regulatory sequences potentially
driving the expression of human ZIC2. We demonstrate that an 804 bp element in
the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) is highly conserved across the evolutionary
history of vertebrates from fish to humans. Furthermore, we show that while
genetic variation of this element is unexpectedly common among holoprosencephaly 
subjects (6/528 or >1%), it is not present in control individuals. Two of six
proband-unique variants are de novo, supporting their pathogenic involvement in
HPE outcomes. These findings support a general recommendation that the
identification and analysis of key ultraconserved elements should be incorporated
into the genetic risk assessment of holoprosencephaly cases.

PMCID: PMC3409191
PMID: 22859937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2012 Nov;94(11):912-7. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23047. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Comparison of mutation findings in ZIC2 between microform and classical
holoprosencephaly in a Brazilian cohort.

Ribeiro LA(1), Roessler E, Hu P, Pineda-Alvarez DE, Zhou N, Jones M,
Chandrasekharappa S, Richieri-Costa A, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory and Clinical Genetics Service, Hospital for
Rehabilitation and Craniofacial Anomalies, University of Sao Paolo, Bauru, Sao
Paolo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly is the most frequent congenital malformation of the
forebrain in humans. It is anatomically classified by the relative degree of
abnormal formation and separation of the developing central nervous system.
Mutations of ZIC2 are the second most common heterozygous variations detected in 
holoprosencephaly (HPE) patients. Mutations in most known HPE genes typically
result in variable phenotypes that rage from classic alobar HPE to microforms
represented by hypotelorism, solitary central maxillary incisor (SCMI), and cleft
lip/palate, among others. Patients with HPE owing to ZIC2 mutations have recently
been described by a distinct phenotype compared with mutations in other HPE
causative genes.
METHODS: We report the comparison of ZIC2 molecular findings by Sanger
bidirectional DNA sequencing and ad hoc genotyping in a cohort of 105 Brazilian
patients within the clinical spectrum of HPE, including classic and microform
groups.
RESULTS: We detected a total of five variants in the ZIC2 gene: a common
histidine tract expansion c.716_718dup (p.His239dup), a rare
c.1377_1391del_homozygous (p.Ala466_470del, or Ala 15 to 10 contraction), a novel
intronic c.1239+18G>A variant, a novel frameshift c.1215dupC (p.Ser406Glnfs*11), 
and a c.1401_1406dup (p.Ala469_470dup, or alanine tract expansion to 17
residues).
CONCLUSIONS: From these patients, only the latter two mutations found in classic 
HPE are likely to be medically significant. In contrast, variants detected in the
microform group are not likely to be pathogenic. We show conclusively that the
histidine tract expansion is a polymorphic alteration that demonstrates
considerable differences in allele frequencies across different ethnic groups.
Therefore, careful population studies of rare variants can improve
genotype-phenotype correlations. Birth Defects Research (Part A) 2012.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3501551
PMID: 22847929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Med Genet. 2012 Jul;49(7):473-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101008.

Genotypic and phenotypic analysis of 396 individuals with mutations in Sonic
Hedgehog.

Solomon BD(1), Bear KA, Wyllie A, Keaton AA, Dubourg C, David V, Mercier S, Odent
S, Hehr U, Paulussen A, Clegg NJ, Delgado MR, Bale SJ, Lacbawan F, Ardinger HH,
Aylsworth AS, Bhengu NL, Braddock S, Brookhyser K, Burton B, Gaspar H, Grix A,
Horovitz D, Kanetzke E, Kayserili H, Lev D, Nikkel SM, Norton M, Roberts R, Saal 
H, Schaefer GB, Schneider A, Smith EK, Sowry E, Spence MA, Shalev SA, Steiner CE,
Thompson EM, Winder TL, Balog JZ, Hadley DW, Zhou N, Pineda-Alvarez DE, Roessler 
E, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
NationalInstitutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common malformation of the human
forebrain, may result from mutations in over 12 genes. Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) was
the first such gene discovered; mutations in SHH remain the most common cause of 
non-chromosomal HPE. The severity spectrum is wide, ranging from incompatibility 
with extrauterine life to isolated midline facial differences.
OBJECTIVE: To characterise genetic and clinical findings in individuals with SHH 
mutations.
METHODS: Through the National Institutes of Health and collaborating centres, DNA
from approximately 2000 individuals with HPE spectrum disorders were analysed for
SHH variations. Clinical details were examined and combined with published cases.
RESULTS: This study describes 396 individuals, representing 157 unrelated
kindreds, with SHH mutations; 141 (36%) have not been previously reported. SHH
mutations more commonly resulted in non-HPE (64%) than frank HPE (36%), and
non-HPE was significantly more common in patients with SHH than in those with
mutations in the other common HPE related genes (p<0.0001 compared to ZIC2 or
SIX3). Individuals with truncating mutations were significantly more likely to
have frank HPE than those with non-truncating mutations (49% vs 35%,
respectively; p=0.012). While mutations were significantly more common in the
N-terminus than in the C-terminus (including accounting for the relative size of 
the coding regions, p=0.00010), no specific genotype-phenotype correlations could
be established regarding mutation location.
CONCLUSIONS: SHH mutations overall result in milder disease than mutations in
other common HPE related genes. HPE is more frequent in individuals with
truncating mutations, but clinical predictions at the individual level remain
elusive.

PMID: 22791840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 15;18(16):4313-24. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

The zinc finger gene ZIC2 has features of an oncogene and its overexpression
correlates strongly with the clinical course of epithelial ovarian cancer.

Marchini S(1), Poynor E, Barakat RR, Clivio L, Cinquini M, Fruscio R, Porcu L,
Bussani C, D'Incalci M, Erba E, Romano M, Cattoretti G, Katsaros D, Koff A,
Luzzatto L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mario Negri Gynecological Oncology Group, Milano,
Italy.

PURPOSE: Epithelial ovarian tumors (EOT) are among the most lethal of
malignancies in women. We have previously identified ZIC2 as expressed at a
higher level in samples of a malignant form (MAL) of EOT than in samples of a
form with low malignant potential (LMP). We have now investigated the role of
ZIC2 in driving tumor growth and its association with clinical outcomes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: ZIC2 expression levels were analyzed in two independent
tumor tissue collections of LMP and MAL. In vitro experiments aimed to test the
role of ZIC2 as a transforming gene. Cox models were used to correlate ZIC2
expression with clinical endpoints.
RESULTS: ZIC2 expression was about 40-fold in terms of mRNA and about 17-fold in 
terms of protein in MAL (n = 193) versus LMP (n = 39) tumors. ZIC2 mRNA levels
were high in MAL cell lines but undetectable in LMP cell lines. Overexpression of
ZIC2 was localized to the nucleus. ZIC2 overexpression increases the growth rate 
and foci formation of NIH3T3 cells and stimulates anchorage-independent colony
formation; downregulation of ZIC2 decreases the growth rate of MAL cell lines.
Zinc finger domains 1 and 2 are required for transforming activity. In stage I
MAL, ZIC2 expression was significantly associated with overall survival in both
univariate (P = 0.046) and multivariate model (P = 0.049).
CONCLUSIONS: ZIC2, a transcription factor related to the sonic hedgehog pathway, 
is a strong discriminant between MAL and LMP tumors: it may be a major
determinant of outcome of EOTs.

PMCID: PMC4582155
PMID: 22733541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2012 Oct;31(5):315-8. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2012.659390.
Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Holoprosencephaly-polydactyly (pseudotrisomy 13) syndrome: case report and
diagnostic criteria.

Sergi C(1), Gekas J, Kamnasaran D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

We report a new case of a fetus with holoprosencephaly-polydactyly syndrome, also
known as pseudo-trisomy 13 syndrome, and no other apparent abnormalities except
for septal agenesis of the left lung. The fetal karyotype was normal. Mutational 
analysis of five genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, ZIC2, and GLI3), which are major genes
associated with holoprosencephaly, did not disclose any mutational findings. We
therefore propose that the abnormalities of our fetus support the demarcation of 
this syndrome as an autonomous phenotype. Specific diagnostic criteria for
holoprosencephaly-polydactyly syndrome need to be complemented by the absence of 
mutations in the major holoprosencephaly genes.

PMID: 22432933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Biol. 2012 May 15;365(2):363-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.03.004. Epub 2012 
Mar 10.

Specific domains of FoxD4/5 activate and repress neural transcription factor
genes to control the progression of immature neural ectoderm to differentiating
neural plate.

Neilson KM(1), Klein SL, Mhaske P, Mood K, Daar IO, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, George Washington University
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 2300 I Street NW, Washington DC, USA.

FoxD4/5, a forkhead transcription factor, plays a critical role in establishing
and maintaining the embryonic neural ectoderm. It both up-regulates genes that
maintain a proliferative, immature neural ectoderm and down-regulates genes that 
promote the transition to a differentiating neural plate. We constructed deletion
and mutant versions of FoxD4/5 to determine which domains are functionally
responsible for these opposite activities, which regulate the critical
developmental transition of neural precursors to neural progenitors to
differentiating neural plate cells. Our results show that up-regulation of genes 
that maintain immature neural precursors (gem, zic2) requires the Acidic blob
(AB) region in the N-terminal portion of the protein, indicating that the AB is
the transactivating domain. Additionally, down-regulation of those genes that
promote the transition to neural progenitors (sox) and those that lead to neural 
differentiation (zic, irx) involves: 1) an interaction with the Groucho
co-repressor at the Eh-1 motif in the C-terminus; and 2) sequence downstream of
this motif. Finally, the ability of FoxD4/5 to induce the ectopic expression of
neural precursor genes in the ventral ectoderm also involves both the AB region
and the Eh-1 motif; FoxD4/5 accomplishes ectopic neural induction by both
activating neural precursor genes and repressing BMP signaling and epidermal
genes. This study identifies the specific, conserved domains of the FoxD4/5
protein that allow this single transcription factor to regulate a network of
genes that controls the transition of a proliferative neural ectodermal
population to a committed neural plate population poised to begin
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3679181
PMID: 22425621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Sci Rep. 2011;1:16. doi: 10.1038/srep00016. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Zic2 hypomorphic mutant mice as a schizophrenia model and ZIC2 mutations
identified in schizophrenia patients.

Hatayama M(1), Ishiguro A, Iwayama Y, Takashima N, Sakoori K, Toyota T, Nozaki Y,
Odaka YS, Yamada K, Yoshikawa T, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep.2011;1:49.

ZIC2 is a causal gene for holoprosencephaly and encodes a zinc-finger-type
transcriptional regulator. We characterized Zic2(kd/+) mice with a moderate (40%)
reduction in Zic2 expression. Zic2(kd/+) mice showed increased locomotor activity
in novel environments, cognitive and sensorimotor gating dysfunctions, and social
behavioral abnormalities. Zic2(kd/+) brain involved enlargement of the lateral
ventricle, thinning of the cerebral cortex and corpus callosum, and decreased
number of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain. Because these features are 
reminiscent of schizophrenia, we examined ZIC2 variant-carrying allele
frequencies in schizophrenia patients and in controls in the Japanese population.
Among three novel missense mutations in ZIC2, R409P was only found in
schizophrenia patients, and was located in a strongly conserved position of the
zinc finger domain. Mouse Zic2 with the corresponding mutation showed lowered
transcription-activating capacity and had impaired target DNA-binding and
co-factor-binding capacities. These results warrant further study of ZIC2 in the 
pathogenesis of schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3216504
PMID: 22355535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Apr;105(4):658-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.01.005. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

Utilizing prospective sequence analysis of SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF in
holoprosencephaly probands to describe the parameters limiting the observed
frequency of mutant gene×gene interactions.

Roessler E(1), Vélez JI, Zhou N, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Clinical molecular diagnostic centers routinely screen SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF
for mutations that can help to explain holoprosencephaly and related brain
malformations. Here we report a prospective Sanger sequence analysis of 189
unrelated probands referred to our diagnostic lab for genetic testing. We
identified 28 novel unique mutations in this group (15%) and no instances of
deleterious mutations in two genes in the same subject. Our result extends that
of other diagnostic centers and suggests that among the aggregate 475
prospectively sequenced holoprosencephaly probands there is negligible evidence
for direct gene-gene interactions among these tested genes. We model the
predictions of the observed mutation frequency in the context of the hypothesis
that gene×gene interactions are a prerequisite for forebrain malformations, i.e. 
the "multiple-hit" hypothesis. We conclude that such a direct interaction would
be expected to be rare and that more subtle genetic and environmental
interactions are a better explanation for the clinically observed inter- and
intra-familial variability.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3309119
PMID: 22310223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):103-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34375. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

Duplication of the ZIC2 gene is not associated with holoprosencephaly.

Jobanputra V(1), Burke A, Kwame AY, Shanmugham A, Shirazi M, Brown S, Warburton
PE, Levy B, Warburton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York, USA. vj2004@columbia.edu

Cytogenetic testing using genomic microarrays presents a clinical challenge when 
data regarding the phenotypic consequences of the genomic alteration are not
available. We describe a chromosome 13q32.3 duplication discovered by microarray 
testing in a fetus with a prenatally detected apparently balanced de novo
translocation 46,XY,t(2;13)(q37;q32). Microarray analysis on the fetal DNA showed
duplications of 384 and 564<U+2009>kb at the breakpoint regions on chromosomes 2q37.3
and 13q32.3, respectively. There were no disease-associated genes in the
duplicated region on chromosome 2q37. The duplicated region on chromosome 13q
contains the ZIC2 gene. Haploinsufficiency of ZIC2 is known to cause
holoprosencephaly and other brain malformations. Studies in the mouse models have
suggested that over expression of ZIC2 may also lead to brain malformations.
Fetal MRI of the brain was normal and the family elected to continue the
pregnancy. An apparently normal baby was born at term. At 3 months of age a
physical exam showed no abnormalities and no developmental delay. This report
shows that duplication of ZIC2 is not necessarily associated with brain
malformations. We also describe the phenotype from four additional patients with 
duplications of the region of chromosome 13 containing ZIC2 and three previously 
described patients with supernumerary marker chromosomes derived from distal
chromosome 13. None of the eight patients had holoprosencephaly or brain
malformations, indicating that duplication of ZIC2 is not associated with brain
anomalies. This information will be useful for counseling in other occurrences of
this duplication identified by microarray.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3715301
PMID: 22105922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):220-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.026. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

Xenopus Zic3 controls notochord and organizer development through suppression of 
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Fujimi TJ(1), Hatayama M, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic3 controls neuroectodermal differentiation and left-right patterning in
Xenopus laevis embryos. Here we demonstrate that Zic3 can suppress Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling and control development of the notochord and Spemann's organizer. When 
we overexpressed Zic3 by injecting its RNA into the dorsal marginal zone of
2-cell-stage embryos, the embryos lost mesodermal dorsal midline structures and
showed reduced expression of organizer markers (Siamois and Goosecoid) and a
notochord marker (Xnot). Co-injection of Siamois RNA partially rescued the
reduction of Xnot expression caused by Zic3 overexpression. Because the
expression of Siamois in the organizer region is controlled by Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling, we subsequently examined the functional interaction between Zic3 and
Wnt signaling. Co-injection of Xenopus Zic RNAs and ß-catenin RNA with a reporter
responsive to the Wnt/ß-catenin cascade indicated that Zic1, Zic2, Zic3, Zic4,
and Zic5 can all suppress ß-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation. In
addition, co-injection of Zic3 RNA inhibited the secondary axis formation caused 
by ventral-side injection of ß-catenin RNA in Xenopus embryos. Zic3-mediated
Wnt/ß-catenin signal suppression required the nuclear localization of Zic3, and
involved the reduction of ß-catenin nuclear transport and enhancement of
ß-catenin degradation. Furthermore, Zic3 co-precipitated with Tcf1 (a ß-catenin
co-factor) and XIC (I-mfa domain containing factor required for dorsoanterior
development). The findings in this report produce a novel system for fine-tuning 
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22056782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;20(4):389-97. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.203. Epub 2011 Nov
2.

Novel mutation and three other sequence variants segregating with phenotype at
keratoconus 13q32 susceptibility locus.

Czugala M(1), Karolak JA, Nowak DM, Polakowski P, Pitarque J, Molinari A,
Rydzanicz M, Bejjani BA, Yue BY, Szaflik JP, Gajecka M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Strzeszynska
32,Poznan, Poland.

Keratoconus (KTCN), a non-inflammatory corneal disorder characterized by stromal 
thinning, represents a major cause of corneal transplantations. Genetic and
environmental factors have a role in the etiology of this complex disease.
Previously reported linkage analysis revealed that chromosomal region 13q32 is
likely to contain causative gene(s) for familial KTCN. Consequently, we have
chosen eight positional candidate genes in this region: MBNL1, IPO5, FARP1,
RNF113B, STK24, DOCK9, ZIC5 and ZIC2, and sequenced all of them in 51 individuals
from Ecuadorian KTCN families and 105 matching controls. The mutation screening
identified one mutation and three sequence variants showing 100% segregation
under a dominant model with KTCN phenotype in one large Ecuadorian family. These 
substitutions were found in three different genes: c.2262A>C (p.Gln754His) and
c.720+43A>G in DOCK9; c.2377-132A>C in IPO5 and c.1053+29G>C in STK24. PolyPhen
analyses predicted that c.2262A>C (Gln754His) is possibly damaging for the
protein function and structure. Our results suggest that c.2262A>C (p.Gln754His) 
mutation in DOCK9 may contribute to the KTCN phenotype in the large KTCN-014
family.

PMCID: PMC3306853
PMID: 22045297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 11;415(1):42-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.007. Epub 2011 Oct 15.

The role of Zic family zinc finger transcription factors in the proliferation and
differentiation of retinal progenitor cells.

Watabe Y(1), Baba Y, Nakauchi H, Mizota A, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Members of the Zic family of zinc finger transcription factors play critical
roles in a variety of developmental processes. Using DNA microarray analysis, we 
found that Zics are strongly expressed in SSEA-1-positive early retinal
progenitors in the peripheral region of the mouse retina. Reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction using mRNA from the retina at various developmental
stages showed that Zic1 and Zic2 are expressed in the embryonic retina and then
gradually disappear during retinal development. Zic3 is also expressed in the
embryonic retina; its expression level slightly decreases but it is expressed
until adulthood. We overexpressed Zic1, Zic2, or Zic3 in retinal progenitors at
embryonic day 17.5 and cultured the retina as explants for 2 weeks. The number of
rod photoreceptors was fewer than in the control, but no other cell types showed 
significant differences between control and Zic overexpressing cells. The
proliferation activity of normal retinal progenitors decreased after 5 days in
culture, as observed in normal in vivo developmental processes. However, Zic
expressing retinal cells continued to proliferate at days 5 and 7, suggesting
that Zics sustain the proliferation activities of retinal progenitor cells. Since
the effects of Zic1, 2, and 3 are indistinguishable in terms of differentiation
and proliferation of retinal progenitors, the redundant function of Zics in
retinal development is suggested.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22024047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Pediatr Dermatol. 2012 Jan-Feb;29(1):89-95. doi:
10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01403.x. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

New syndrome of congenital circumferential skin folds associated with multiple
congenital anomalies.

Basel-Vanagaite L(1), Sprecher E, Gat A, Merlob P, Albin-Kaplanski A, Konen O,
Solomon BD, Muenke M, Grzeschik KH, Sirota L.

Author information: 
(1)Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel and Raphael Recanati Genetic
Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Tikva, Israel.
basel@post.tau.ac.il

Congenital circumferential skin folds can be found in individuals with no
additional defects, as well as in patients with multiple congenital anomalies and
developmental abnormalities. Current data point to etiological heterogeneity of
syndromic cases. We describe a 7-month-old girl with a novel combination of
symmetrical congenital circumferential skin folds, dysmorphic features, and
multiple congenital abnormalities. Examination of the patient revealed
symmetrical congenital circumferential skin folds and dysmorphic features, as
well as multiple congenital anomalies including nasal pyriform aperture stenosis,
ventricular septal defect, absent spleen, camptodactyly, and severe psychomotor
retardation. Skin biopsy demonstrated subcutaneous fat extending into the
superficial and deep reticular dermis. Sequencing of the CDON, SHH, ZIC2, SIX3,
and TGIF genes (associated with holoprosencephaly) did not disclose pathogenic
alterations. Extensive review of previously described cases of syndromic
congenital circumferential skin folds did not reveal a similar combination of
clinical and histopathological findings.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4131925
PMID: 21995818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Nov;155A(11):2901; author reply 2902. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.a.34282. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

ZIC2 mutations are seen in holoprosencephaly and not partial
rhombencephalosynapsis.

Guleria S.

Comment on
    Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jul;155A(7):1574-80.

PMID: 21990207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Nov;155A(11):2713-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34261. Epub 2011
Oct 4.

A broad range of ophthalmologic anomalies is part of the holoprosencephaly
spectrum.

Pineda-Alvarez DE(1), Solomon BD, Roessler E, Balog JZ, Hadley DW, Zein WM,
Hadsall CK, Brooks BP, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2012 May;158A(5):1243; author reply 1244-5.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common disorder of the developing forebrain
in humans, and is characterized by failed or incomplete cleavage of the cerebral 
hemispheres and deep brain structures. HPE includes wide phenotypic variability, 
with a continuum of both brain and craniofacial anomalies. While "classic" eye
findings, including the spectrum of midline anomalies ranging from cyclopia to
hypotelorism, as well as chorioretinal coloboma and microphthalmia, have been
frequently described in patients with HPE, other subtle eye anomalies may also
occur. In our study we prospectively analyzed a small cohort of 10 patients in
whom we identified mutations in SHH, SIX3, ZIC2, or FGF8, the latter of which is 
a very recently described HPE-associated gene. We found that 9 of 10 patients had
at least two ophthalmologic anomalies, including refractive errors, microcornea, 
microphthalmia, blepharoptosis, exotropia, and uveal coloboma. These findings
contribute to the understanding of the phenotypic variability of the HPE
spectrum, and highlight findings in one medically important but often
incompletely investigated system.

Published 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. This article is a U.S. Government work and
is in the public domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3200498
PMID: 21976454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Med Genet. 2011 Nov;48(11):752-60. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100339. Epub
2011 Sep 22.

New findings for phenotype-genotype correlations in a large European series of
holoprosencephaly cases.

Mercier S(1), Dubourg C, Garcelon N, Campillo-Gimenez B, Gicquel I, Belleguic M, 
Ratié L, Pasquier L, Loget P, Bendavid C, Jaillard S, Rochard L, Quélin C, Dupé
V, David V, Odent S.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Clinique, CLAD Ouest, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common forebrain defect in
humans. It results from incomplete midline cleavage of the prosencephalon.
METHODS: A large European series of 645 HPE probands (and 699 relatives),
consisting of 51% fetuses and 49% liveborn children, is reported.
RESULTS: Mutations in the four main genes involved in HPE (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF)
were identified in 25% of cases. The SHH, SIX3, and TGIF mutations were inherited
in more than 70% of these cases, whereas 70% of the mutations in ZIC2 occurred de
novo. Moreover, rearrangements were detected in 22% of the 260 patients screened 
by array comparative genomic hybridisation. 15 probands had two mutations
providing additional support for the 'multiple-hit process' in HPE. There was a
positive correlation between the severity of the brain malformation and facial
features for SHH, SIX3, and TGIF, but no such correlation was found for ZIC2
mutations. The most severe HPE types were associated with SIX3 and ZIC2
mutations, whereas microforms were associated with SHH mutations. The study
focused on the associated brain malformations, including neuronal migration
defects, which predominated in individuals with ZIC2 mutations, and neural tube
defects, which were frequently associated with ZIC2 (rachischisis) and TGIF
mutations. Extracraniofacial features were observed in 27% of the individuals in 
this series (up to 40% of those with ZIC2 mutations) and a significant
correlation was found between renal/urinary defects and mutations of SHH and
ZIC2.
CONCLUSIONS: An algorithm is proposed based on these new phenotype-genotype
correlations, to facilitate molecular analysis and genetic counselling for HPE.

PMCID: PMC3386902
PMID: 21940735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 28;286(43):37732-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.242826. Epub
2011 Sep 9.

Transcription factor Zic2 inhibits Wnt/ß-catenin protein signaling.

Pourebrahim R(1), Houtmeyers R, Ghogomu S, Janssens S, Thelie A, Tran HT,
Langenberg T, Vleminckx K, Bellefroid E, Cassiman JJ, Tejpar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium.

The Zic transcription factors play critical roles during embryonic development.
Mutations in the ZIC2 gene are associated with human holoprosencephaly, but the
etiology is still unclear. Here, we report a novel function for ZIC2 as a
regulator of ß-catenin·TCF4-mediated transcription. We show that ZIC2 can bind
directly to the DNA-binding high mobility group box of TCF4 via its zinc finger
domain and inhibit the transcriptional activity of the ß-catenin·TCF4 complex.
However, the binding of TCF4 to DNA was not affected by ZIC2. Zic2 RNA injection 
completely inhibited ß-catenin-induced axis duplication in Xenopus embryos and
strongly blocked the ability of ß-catenin to induce expression of known Wnt
targets in animal caps. Moreover, Zic2 knockdown in transgenic Xenopus Wnt
reporter embryos led to ectopic Wnt signaling activity mainly at the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary. Together, our results demonstrate a previously
unknown role for ZIC2 as a transcriptional regulator of the ß-catenin·TCF4
complex.

PMCID: PMC3199516
PMID: 21908606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023213. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Sexual phenotype differences in zic2 mRNA abundance in the preoptic area of a
protogynous teleost, Thalassoma bifasciatum.

McCaffrey K(1), Hawkins MB, Godwin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and W.M. Keck Center for Behavioral Biology, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, United States of America.

The highly conserved members of the zic family of zinc-finger transcription
factors are primarily known for their roles in embryonic signaling pathways and
regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation. This study describes
sexual phenotype differences in abundances of zic2 mRNA in the preoptic area of
the hypothalamus, a region strongly implicated in sexual behavior and function,
in an adult teleost, Thalassoma bifasciatum. The bluehead wrasse (Thalassoma
bifasciatum) is a valuable model for studying neuroendocrine processes because it
displays two discrete male phenotypes, initial phase (IP) males and territorial, 
terminal phase (TP) males, and undergoes socially-controlled protogynous sex
change. Previously generated microarray-based comparisons suggested that zic2 was
upregulated in the brains of terminal phase males relative to initial phase
males. To further explore this difference, we cloned a 727 bp sequence for neural
zic2 from field-collected animals. Riboprobe-based in situ hybridization was
employed to localize zic2 signal in adult bluehead brains and assess the relative
abundance of brain zic2 mRNA across sexual phenotypes. We found zic2 mRNA
expression was extremely abundant in the granular cells of the cerebellum and
widespread in other brain regions including in the thalamus, hypothalamus,
habenula, torus semicircularis, torus longitudinalis, medial longitudinal
fascicle and telencephalic areas. Quantitative autoradiography and
phosphorimaging showed zic2 mRNA hybridization signal in the preoptic area of the
hypothalamus was significantly higher in terminal phase males relative to both
initial phase males and females, and silver grain analysis confirmed this
relationship between phenotypes. No significant difference in abundance was found
in zic2 signal across phenotypes in the habenula, a brain region not implicated
in the control of sexual behavior, or cerebellum.

PMCID: PMC3149650
PMID: 21826240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Sep 15;20(18):3678-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr289. Epub 2011 Jun
21.

Folic acid supplementation can adversely affect murine neural tube closure and
embryonic survival.

Marean A(1), Graf A, Zhang Y, Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)HHMI and Department of Pediatrics, Programs in Molecular Biology, University
of Colorado AnschutzMedical Campus and Childrens Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO
80045, USA.

Neural tube defects (NTDs), a common birth defect in humans, result from the
failure of the embryonic neural tube (NT) to close properly. NT closure is a
complex, poorly understood morphogenetic process influenced by genes and
environment. The most effective environmental influence in decreasing the risk
for NTDs is folic acid (FA) fortification and supplementation, and these findings
led to the recommendation of periconceptual FA intake and mandatory fortification
of the US grain supply in 1998. To explore the relationship between genetics and 
responsiveness to FA supplementation, we used five mouse NTDs models-Zic2,
Shroom3, Frem2, Grhl2 (Grainyhead-like 2) and L3P (Line3P)-and a long-term
generational FA supplementation scheme. Contrary to expectations, we find that
three genetic mutants respond adversely to FA supplementation with increased
incidence of NTDs in homozygous mutants, occurrence of NTDs in heterozygous
embryos and embryonic lethality prior to NT closure. Because of these unexpected 
responses, we examined NTD risk after short-term FA supplementation. Our results 
indicate that, for the same genetic allele, NTD risk can depend on the length of 
FA exposure. Our data indicate that, depending on the gene mutation, FA
supplementation may adversely influence embryonic development and NT closure.

PMCID: PMC3159553
PMID: 21693562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Pathol. 2011 Dec;225(4):525-34. doi: 10.1002/path.2901. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

Zic2 synergistically enhances Hedgehog signalling through nuclear retention of
Gli1 in cervical cancer cells.

Chan DW(1), Liu VW, Leung LY, Yao KM, Chan KK, Cheung AN, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Hong Kong, People's Republic of China.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signalling has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of human cancers. However, the cognate molecular mechanisms
contributing to this disregulated pathway are incompletely understood. In this
study, we showed that Zic2 was frequently over-expressed and associated with
high-grade cervical cancer (p = 0.032), high levels of Gli1 (p < 0.001) and
CyclinD1 (p < 0.001) by immunohistochemical and quantitative RT-PCR analyses.
Further biochemical studies using luciferase reporter, co-immunoprecipitation,
subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analyses demonstrated that Zic2 
can physically interact with Gli1 and retain it in the nucleus, which in turn
increases Gli-mediated transcriptional activity. Gain- and loss-of-function
analyses of Zic2 showed that Zic2 could increase Hh signalling activity, cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth ability in cervical cancer cells. 
Conversely, deletion of the zinc finger domain at C-terminus of Zic2
significantly abrogated its interaction with Gli1, the retention of Gli1 in the
nucleus, effects on Hh signalling activity and oncogenic properties in cervical
cancer cells. Our findings suggest that Zic2 is a positive modulator increasing
Gli1 transcriptional and oncogenic activity by retaining Gli1 in the nucleus of
cervical cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21661123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jul;155A(7):1574-80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34029. Epub 2011 
Jun 2.

Recurrent partial rhombencephalosynapsis and holoprosencephaly in siblings with a
mutation of ZIC2.

Ramocki MB(1), Scaglia F, Stankiewicz P, Belmont JW, Jones JY, Clark GD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Neuroscience, Department of 
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. mramocki@bcm.edu

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Nov;155A(11):2901; author reply 2902.

Rhombencephalosynapsis (RES) is a rare congenital brain malformation typically
identified by magnetic resonance imaging and characterized by fusion of the
cerebellar hemispheres and dentate nuclei and vermian agenesis or hypogenesis.
Although RES is frequently found in conjunction with other brain malformations
and/or congenital anomalies, no specific molecular etiology has been discovered
to date and no animal models exist. We identified two half sisters with alobar or
semi-lobar holoprosencephaly (HPE) and partial RES, suggesting that genes linked 
to HPE may also contribute to RES. A deletion of seven base pairs in exon one of 
the ZIC2 gene (c.392_98del7) was identified in each of the two half sisters with 
HPE and partial RES. To identify genetic causes of RES and to assess whether
genes identified in HPE have a role in RES, we tested 11 additional individuals
with RES by high-resolution chromosome analysis, chromosomal microarray analysis,
and sequencing of four HPE genes. No mutations in ZIC2 or in other genes that
cause HPE were identified, suggesting that mutation of ZIC2 is a rare cause of,
or contributor to, RES associated with HPE. In addition, an individual with a
complex rearrangement of chromosome 22q13.3 and RES was identified, suggesting
the presence of a dosage-sensitive gene that may contribute to RES in this
region.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3121908
PMID: 21638761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 Nov;29(6):709-16. doi: 10.1007/s00774-011-0271-y. Epub
2011 Jun 3.

Identification of genes for bone mineral density variation by computational
disease gene identification strategy.

Li GH(1), Deng HW, Kung AW, Huang QY.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Lab of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, College of Life
Science, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.

We previously used five freely available bioinformatics tools (Prioritizer,
Geneseeker, PROSPECTR and SUSPECTS, Disease Gene Prediction, and Endeavour) to
analyze the thirteen well-replicated osteoporosis susceptibility loci and
identify a subset of most likely candidate osteoporosis susceptibility genes
(Huang et al. in J Hum Genet 53:644-655, 2008). In the current study, we
experimentally tested the association between bone mineral density (BMD) and the 
9 most likely candidate genes [LAMC2(1q25-q31), MATN3(2p24-p23), ITGAV(2q31-q32),
ACVR1(2q23-q24), TDGF1(3p21.31), EGF(4q25), IGF1(12q22-q23), ZIC2(13q32),
BMP2(20p12)] which were pinpointed by 4 or more bioinformatics tools. Forty tag
SNPs in nine candidate genes were genotyped in a southern Chinese female
case-control cohort consisting of 1643 subjects. Single- and multi-marker
association analyses were performed using logistic regression analysis
implemented by PLINK. Potential transcription factor binding sites were predicted
by MatInspector. The strongest association was observed between rs10178256
(MATN3) and trochanter (P < 0.001) and total hip BMD (P = 0.002). The SNP rs6214 
(IGF1) showed consistent association with BMD at all the four measured skeletal
sites (P = 0.005-0.044). Prediction of transcription factor binding suggested
that the minor allele G of rs10178256 might abolish the binding of MESP1 and
MESP2 which play vital roles in bone homeostasis, whereas the minor allele G of
rs6214 might create an additional binding site for XBP1, a constitutive regulator
of endoplasmic reticulum stress response. Our data suggested that variants in
MATN3 and IGF1 were involved in BMD regulation in southern Chinese women.

© The Japanese Society for Bone and Mineral Research and Springer 2011

PMID: 21638018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Clin Genet. 2012 Jun;81(6):584-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01684.x. Epub
2011 May 23.

Holoprosencephaly and ZIC2 microdeletions: novel clinical and epidemiological
specificities delineated.

Chabchoub E(1), Willekens D, Vermeesch JR, Fryns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals of Leuven, Catholic University
of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. elyes.chabchoub@med.kuleuven.be

Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common malformation of the human brain results 
from abnormal cleavage of the forebrain during the early embryonic developmental 
stages. The spectrum of malformations in HPE is wide, ranging from the classical 
cyclopia/proboscis to fairly asymptomatic forms [i.e. a single maxillary central 
incisor (SMCI)]. HPE may be caused by environmental or genetic factors. ZIC2
(13q32) was the second gene identified in which mutations cause HPE and recently 
a specific phenotype was ascribed to ZIC2-mutation HPE. Earlier, we reported a
boy presenting HPE and deafness. Cytogenetic analyses were normal. Using
array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), we found a de novo 129 kb
del(13)(q32) encompassing ZIC2 and ZIC5. There is no evidence for the involvement
of ZIC5 in human diseases. We reviewed the literature for ZIC2-ZIC5 deletions and
their involvement in neural tube defects (NTDs). Interestingly, we found evidence
for a specific facial phenotype for ZIC2 gene deletion patients distinct from
those with point mutations. In addition, based on the clinical data together with
pathology, imaging and functional studies, we suggest an outline for a model
explaining the genetic heterogeneity of ZIC2-ZIC5-associated NTDs and propose
further studies for validation.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21496007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):860-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33903. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

Holoprosencephaly in a family segregating novel variants in ZIC2 and GLI2.

Wannasilp N(1), Solomon BD, Warren-Mora N, Clegg NJ, Delgado MR, Lacbawan F, Hu
P, Winder TL, Roessler E, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common malformation of the human forebrain.
Typical manifestations in affected patients include a characteristic pattern of
structural brain and craniofacial anomalies. HPE may be caused by mutations in
over 10 identified genes; the inheritance is traditionally viewed as autosomal
dominant with highly variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance. We present 
the description of a family simultaneously segregating two novel variants in the 
HPE-associated genes, ZIC2 and GLI2, as well as the results of extensive
population-based studies of the variant region in GLI2. This is the first time
that multiple HPE-associated variants in these genes have been reported in one
family, and raises important questions about how clinicians and researchers
should view the inheritance of conditions such as HPE.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21416594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Syst Biol. 2011 Feb 26;5:35. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-5-35.

A Boolean-based systems biology approach to predict novel genes associated with
cancer: Application to colorectal cancer.

Nagaraj SH(1), Reverter A.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation, Division of Livestock Industries, Queensland Bioscience
Precinct, 306 Carmody Road, St, Lucia, Brisbane, Queensland 4067, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Cancer has remarkable complexity at the molecular level, with
multiple genes, proteins, pathways and regulatory interconnections being
affected. We introduce a systems biology approach to study cancer that formally
integrates the available genetic, transcriptomic, epigenetic and molecular
knowledge on cancer biology and, as a proof of concept, we apply it to colorectal
cancer.
RESULTS: We first classified all the genes in the human genome into
cancer-associated and non-cancer-associated genes based on extensive literature
mining. We then selected a set of functional attributes proven to be highly
relevant to cancer biology that includes protein kinases, secreted proteins,
transcription factors, post-translational modifications of proteins, DNA
methylation and tissue specificity. These cancer-associated genes were used to
extract 'common cancer fingerprints' through these molecular attributes, and a
Boolean logic was implemented in such a way that both the expression data and
functional attributes could be rationally integrated, allowing for the generation
of a guilt-by-association algorithm to identify novel cancer-associated genes.
Finally, these candidate genes are interlaced with the known cancer-related genes
in a network analysis aimed at identifying highly conserved gene interactions
that impact cancer outcome. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach
using colorectal cancer as a test case and identify several novel candidate genes
that are classified according to their functional attributes. These genes include
the following: 1) secreted proteins as potential biomarkers for the early
detection of colorectal cancer (FXYD1, GUCA2B, REG3A); 2) kinases as potential
drug candidates to prevent tumor growth (CDC42BPB, EPHB3, TRPM6); and 3)
potential oncogenic transcription factors (CDK8, MEF2C, ZIC2).
CONCLUSION: We argue that this is a holistic approach that faithfully mimics
cancer characteristics, efficiently predicts novel cancer-associated genes and
has universal applicability to the study and advancement of cancer research.

PMCID: PMC3051904
PMID: 21352556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 1;351(1):120-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.037. Epub 2011
Jan 4.

A role for Zic1 and Zic2 in Myf5 regulation and somite myogenesis.

Pan H(1), Gustafsson MK, Aruga J, Tiedken JJ, Chen JC, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

Zic genes encode a conserved family of zinc finger proteins with essential
functions in neural development and axial skeletal patterning in the vertebrate
embryo. Zic proteins also function as Gli co-factors in Hedgehog signaling. Here,
we report that Zic genes have a role in Myf5 regulation for epaxial somite
myogenesis in the mouse embryo. In situ hybridization studies show that Zic1, 2, 
and 3 transcripts are expressed in Myf5-expressing epaxial myogenic progenitors
in the dorsal medial dermomyotome of newly forming somites, and
immunohistological studies show that Zic2 protein is co-localized with Myf5 and
Pax3 in the dorsal medial lip of the dermomyotome, but is not expressed in the
forming myotome. In functional reporter assays, Zic1 and Zic2, but not Zic3,
potentiate the transactivation of Gli-dependent Myf5 epaxial somite-specific (ES)
enhancer activity in 3T3 cells, and Zic1 activates endogenous Myf5 expression in 
10T1/2 cells and in presomitic mesoderm explants. Zic2 also co-immunoprecipitates
with Gli2, indicating that Zic2 forms complexes with Gli2 to promote Myf5
expression. Genetic studies show that, although Zic2 and Zic1 are activated
normally in sonic hedgehog(-/-) mutant embryos, Myf5 expression in newly forming 
somites is deficient in both sonic hedgehog(-/-) and in Zic2(kd/kd) mutant mouse 
embryos, providing further evidence that these Zic genes are upstream regulators 
of Hedgehog-mediated Myf5 activation. Myf5 activation in newly forming somites is
delayed in Zic2 mutant embryos until the time of Zic1 activation, and both Zic2
and Myf5 require noggin for their activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3045035
PMID: 21211521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Panminerva Med. 2010 Dec;52(4):345-54.

Etiopathogenetic advances and management of holoprosencephaly: from bench to
bedside.

Bellone S(1), De Rienzo F, Prodam F, Savastio S, Busti A, Genoni G, Aimaretti G, 
Bona G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Piemonte
Orientale, Novara, Italy.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a complex brain malformation caused by impaired or
incomplete midline division of the prosencephalon. It's characterized by cerebral
and facial anomalies of different levels of severity. Both genetic and
environmental factors are known to cause HPE, but they cover only few cases.
Genetic causes are responsible for about 20% of cases: they are chromosomal
abnormalities and gene mutations: up to date, nine genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, 
PATCHED1, TDGF1/CRIPTO, FAST1, GLI2 and DHCR) are definitely associated with HPE,
but many others candidate gene are under investigation. The diagnosis of HPE is
usually prenatal and is based on systematic ultrasound scan (US) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). Children with HPE have many medical problems in
agreement with the severity of the brain malformation: craniofacial
abnormalities, neurological signs, endocrine disorders, oromotor and dysautonomic
dysfunction, thus requiring a multidisciplinary team for symptomatic treatment of
manifestations, prevention of complications and parental support. Genetic
counselling is an important step, often made difficult by extreme phenotypic
variability, genetic heterogeneity, and a high risk of recurrence in apparently
sporadic cases. In conclusion it can be concluded that we are far from a complete
explanation of the etiopathogenesis. Future researches on genomic rearrangements 
all over the genome with techniques like the CGH array should lead to the
identification of other causal genes and could improve diagnosis and prognosis. A
skill multidisciplinary approach is mandatory to offer the better clinical
assistance to patients and their parents.

PMID: 21183895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011 Feb;4(1):26-35. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.941757.
Epub 2010 Dec 2.

Gene coexpression network topology of cardiac development, hypertrophy, and
failure.

Dewey FE(1), Perez MV, Wheeler MT, Watt C, Spin J, Langfelder P, Horvath S,
Hannenhalli S, Cappola TP, Ashley EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Stanford Hospital and Clinics, and Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011 Feb;4(1):2-3.

BACKGROUND: Network analysis techniques allow a more accurate reflection of
underlying systems biology to be realized than traditional unidimensional
molecular biology approaches. Using gene coexpression network analysis, we define
the gene expression network topology of cardiac hypertrophy and failure and the
extent of recapitulation of fetal gene expression programs in failing and
hypertrophied adult myocardium.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We assembled all myocardial transcript data in the Gene
Expression Omnibus (n=1617). Because hierarchical analysis revealed species had
primacy over disease clustering, we focused this analysis on the most complete
(murine) dataset (n=478). Using gene coexpression network analysis, we derived
functional modules, regulatory mediators, and higher-order topological
relationships between genes and identified 50 gene coexpression modules in
developing myocardium that were not present in normal adult tissue. We found that
known gene expression markers of myocardial adaptation were members of
upregulated modules but not hub genes. We identified ZIC2 as a novel
transcription factor associated with coexpression modules common to developing
and failing myocardium. Of 50 fetal gene coexpression modules, 3 (6%) were
reproduced in hypertrophied myocardium and 7 (14%) were reproduced in failing
myocardium. One fetal module was common to both failing and hypertrophied
myocardium.
CONCLUSIONS: Network modeling allows systems analysis of cardiovascular
development and disease. Although we did not find evidence for a global
coordinated program of fetal gene expression in adult myocardial adaptation, our 
analysis revealed specific gene expression modules active during both development
and disease and specific candidates for their regulation.

PMCID: PMC3324316
PMID: 21127201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. EMBO J. 2010 Sep 15;29(18):3037-8. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.209.

Target practice: Zic2 hits the bullseye!

Wilson SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Umeå Center for Molecular Medicine, 90187 Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
sara.wilson@ucmm.umu.se

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2010 Sep 15;29(18):3170-83.

PMCID: PMC2944073
PMID: 20842174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Sep;152A(9):2308-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33550.

Description of the smallest critical region for Dandy-Walker malformation in
chromosome 13 in a girl with a cryptic deletion related to t(6;13)(q23;q32).

Mademont-Soler I(1), Morales C, Armengol L, Soler A, Sánchez A.

Author information: 
(1)Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

We report on a girl with mild dysmorphic facial features, Dandy-Walker
malformation (DWM), iris coloboma, profound hearing loss, and hyperlaxity of skin
and joints, whose karyotype is 46,XX,t(6;13)(q23;q32)dn and who has a cryptic
imbalance at the 13q32 translocation breakpoint assessed by array-CGH. Our
patient has many clinical manifestations in common with those of the previously
reported cases of 13q32 deletions, which suggests that at least part of the
abnormal phenotype is probably due to the imbalance. The recurrent finding of DWM
among patients with 13q deletions has led to the suggestions that candidate
gene/s for its development are on chromosome 13. We describe the smallest 13q
deletion associated to DWM, which allows further narrowing of the previously
established critical region for this brain malformation to 13q32.2-32.3. Among
the few genes of the deleted region, ZIC2 and ZIC5 seem the most plausible
candidates, which is in keeping with some previous reports. This work also
illustrates the usefulness of array-CGH platforms in the identification of
cryptic imbalances in carriers of apparently balanced rearrangements with
abnormal phenotypes.

PMID: 20683983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. EMBO J. 2010 Sep 15;29(18):3170-83. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.172. Epub 2010 Jul
30.

Zic2 regulates the expression of Sert to modulate eye-specific refinement at the 
visual targets.

García-Frigola C(1), Herrera E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas & 
Universidad Miguel Hernandez, Alicante, Spain.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Sep 15;29(18):3037-8.

The development of the nervous system is a time-ordered and multi-stepped process
that requires neural specification, axonal navigation and arbor refinement at the
target tissues. Previous studies have demonstrated that the transcription factor 
Zic2 is necessary and sufficient for the specification of retinal ganglion cells 
(RGCs) that project ipsilaterally at the optic chiasm midline. Here, we report
that, in addition, Zic2 controls the refinement of eye-specific inputs in the
visual targets by regulating directly the expression of the serotonin transporter
(Sert), which is involved in the modulation of activity-dependent mechanisms
during the wiring of sensory circuits. In agreement with these findings, RGCs
that express Zic2 ectopically show defects in axonal refinement at the visual
targets and respond to pharmacological blockage of Sert, whereas Zic2-negative
contralateral RGCs do not. These results link, at the molecular level, early
events in neural differentiation with late activity-dependent processes and
propose a mechanism for the establishment of eye-specific domains at the visual
targets.

PMCID: PMC2944059
PMID: 20676059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;19(1):preceeding 118-20. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.110.
Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Clinical utility gene card for: Holoprosencephaly.

Dubourg C(1), David V, Gropman A, Mercier S, Muenke M, Odent S, Pineda-Alvarez
DE, Roessler E.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 6061 CNRS IGDR, CHU Pontchaillou,University of
Rennes, Rennes, France. christele.dubourg@chu-rennes.fr

PMCID: PMC3039493
PMID: 20648050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jul;152A(7):1688-94. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33466.

Holoprosencephaly and holoprosencephaly-like phenotype and GAS1 DNA sequence
changes: Report of four Brazilian patients.

Ribeiro LA(1), Quiezi RG, Nascimento A, Bertolacini CP, Richieri-Costa A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory and Clinical Genetic Service, Hospital for
Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, USP, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is genetically heterogeneous. Variable phenotypic
manifestations within families with normal and affected patients have been
attributed to the number and type of HPE gene mutations. Environmental agents may
also contribute to the severity as well as the requirement of multiple hits.
Clinical expression is extremely variable ranging from minor facial signs to
complex craniofacial anomalies such as cyclopia. Main genes involved include SHH,
GLI2, PTCH1, TGIF, ZIC2, TDGF1, SIX3; however, several other candidates have been
proposed. Recently it was established that the human growth arrest specific gene 
1 (GAS1) is a potential locus for several human craniofacial malformations. Here,
we report on four Brazilian patients with GAS1 DNA sequence change who presented 
variable phenotypical manifestations ranging from classic HPE to HPE-like signs. 
Two patients had single DNA sequence change in the GAS1 gene, while in other two,
an additional mutation in the SHH gene was observed. Clinical manifestations
presented by these patients suggest that GAS1 could be considered a candidate
locus for one of the types of human HPE.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20583177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. BMC Res Notes. 2010 Jun 16;3:167. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-3-167.

Expression of the zic1, zic2, zic3, and zic4 genes in early chick embryos.

McMahon AR(1), Merzdorf CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Montana State University,
Bozeman, MT 59717, USA. merzdorf@montana.edu.

BACKGROUND: The zic genes encode a family of transcription factors with important
roles during early development. Since little is known about zic gene expression
in chick embryos, we have characterized the expression patterns of the zic1,
zic2, zic3, and zic4 (zic1-4) genes during neurulation and somitogenesis.
FINDINGS: We used in situ hybridization to analyze the expression patterns of the
zic1-4 genes during early chick development (HH stages 7-19). The zic1-3 genes
showed both overlapping and gene-specific expression patterns along the length of
the dorsal neural tube and in the dorsal parts of the somites. In addition,
unique expression domains of zic genes included: zic2 in the neural plate,
periotic mesoderm and limb buds; zic3 in the paraxial mesoderm surrounding the
neural plate, in presomitic mesoderm and in the most recently formed epithelial
somites; zic2 and zic3 in developing eyes. zic4 expression was limited to dorsal 
fore- and midbrain regions and, unlike the expression of the zic1-3 genes, zic4
expression was not detected in the hindbrain and trunk. This was in contrast to
more extensive zic4 expression in other vertebrates.
CONCLUSIONS: The zic1-3 genes were expressed in both overlapping and unique
domains within the neural tube, somites and other ectoderm and mesoderm-derived
structures in the future head and trunk. zic4 expression, however, was limited to
dorso-anterior regions of the future brain. This is the first comprehensive study
of zic1-4 gene expression in chick embryos during neurulation and somitogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2908108
PMID: 20553611  [PubMed]


77. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep;18(9):999-1005. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.70. Epub 2010
Jun 9.

The unfolding clinical spectrum of holoprosencephaly due to mutations in SHH,
ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF genes.

Paulussen AD(1), Schrander-Stumpel CT, Tserpelis DC, Spee MK, Stegmann AP,
Mancini GM, Brooks AS, Collée M, Maat-Kievit A, Simon ME, van Bever Y,
Stolte-Dijkstra I, Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Herkert JC, van Essen AJ, Lichtenbelt
KD, van Haeringen A, Kwee ML, Lachmeijer AM, Tan-Sindhunata GM, van Maarle MC,
Arens YH, Smeets EE, de Die-Smulders CE, Engelen JJ, Smeets HJ, Herbergs J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, School for Oncology & Developmental Biology
(GROW), Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands. aimee.paulussen@gen.unimaas.nl

Holoprosencephaly is a severe malformation of the brain characterized by abnormal
formation and separation of the developing central nervous system. The prevalence
is 1:250 during early embryogenesis, the live-born prevalence is 1:16 000. The
etiology of HPE is extremely heterogeneous and can be teratogenic or genetic. We 
screened four known HPE genes in a Dutch cohort of 86 non-syndromic HPE index
cases, including 53 family members. We detected 21 mutations (24.4%), 3 in SHH, 9
in ZIC2 and 9 in SIX3. Eight mutations involved amino-acid substitutions, 7
ins/del mutations, 1 frame-shift, 3 identical poly-alanine tract expansions and 2
gene deletions. Pathogenicity of mutations was presumed based on de novo
character, predicted non-functionality of mutated proteins, segregation of
mutations with affected family-members or combinations of these features. Two
mutations were reported previously. SNP array confirmed detected deletions; one
spanning the ZIC2/ZIC5 genes (approx. 100 kb) the other a 1.45 Mb deletion
including SIX2/SIX3 genes. The mutation percentage (24%) is comparable with
previous reports, but we detected significantly less mutations in SHH: 3.5 vs
10.7% (P=0.043) and significantly more in SIX3: 10.5 vs 4.3% (P=0.018). For TGIF1
and ZIC2 mutation the rate was in conformity with earlier reports. About half of 
the mutations were de novo, one was a germ line mosaic. The familial mutations
displayed extensive heterogeneity in clinical manifestation. Of seven familial
index patients only two parental carriers showed minor HPE signs, five were
completely asymptomatic. Therefore, each novel mutation should be considered as a
risk factor for clinically manifest HPE, with the caveat of reduced clinical
penetrance.

PMCID: PMC2987413
PMID: 20531442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. BMC Cancer. 2010 Mar 3;10:79. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-79.

Expression of ZIC family genes in meningiomas and other brain tumors.

Aruga J(1), Nozaki Y, Hatayama M, Odaka YS, Yokota N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Zic zinc finger proteins are present in the developing rodent
meninges and are required for cell proliferation and differentiation of meningeal
progenitors. Although human ZIC genes are known to be molecular markers for
medulloblastomas, their expression in meningioma has not been addressed to date.
METHODS: We examined the mRNA and protein expression of human ZIC1, ZIC2, ZIC3,
ZIC4 and ZIC5 genes in meningiomas in comparison to other brain tumors, using
RT-PCR, analysis of published microarray data, and immunostaining.
RESULTS: ZIC1, ZIC2 and ZIC5 transcript levels in meningiomas were higher than
those in whole brain or normal dura mater, whereas all five ZIC genes were
abundantly expressed in medulloblastomas. The expression level of ZIC1 in public 
microarray data was greater in meningiomas classified as World Health
Organization Grade II (atypical) than those classified as Grade I (benign).
Immunoscreening using anti-ZIC antibodies revealed that 23 out of 23 meningioma
cases were ZIC1/2/3/5-immunopositive. By comparison, nuclear staining by the
anti-ZIC4 antibody was not observed in any meningioma case, but was strongly
detected in all four medulloblastomas. ZIC-positive meningiomas included
meningothelial, fibrous, transitional, and psammomatous histological subtypes. In
normal meninges, ZIC-like immunoreactivities were detected in vimentin-expressing
arachnoid cells both in human and mouse.
CONCLUSIONS: ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC5 are novel molecular markers for meningiomas
whereas ZIC4 expression is highly selective for medulloblastomas. The pattern of 
ZIC expression in both of these tumor types may reflect the properties of the
tissues from which the tumors are derived.

PMCID: PMC2838823
PMID: 20199689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2010 Feb 15;154C(1):191-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.30246.

Genetic counseling and "molecular" prenatal diagnosis of holoprosencephaly (HPE).

Mercier S(1), Dubourg C, Belleguic M, Pasquier L, Loget P, Lucas J, Bendavid C,
Odent S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rennes, France.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a structural anomaly of the developing brain in which 
the forebrain fails to divide into two separate hemispheres and ventricles. The
poor prognosis in the most severe forms justifies the importance of genetic
counseling in affected families. The genetic counseling requires a thorough
clinical approach given the extreme variability of phenotype and etiology. The
karyotype is an essential diagnostic tool. Since mutations in the four major
genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF) have been identified in HPE patients, molecular
study is performed routinely in nonsyndromic HPE. New molecular tools, such as
array-CGH analysis, are now part of the diagnostic process. Prenatal diagnosis is
based primarily on fetal imaging, but "molecular" prenatal diagnosis can be
performed if a mutation has been previously identified in a proband.
Interpretations of molecular diagnosis must be given with caution, given the lack
of strict genotype-phenotype correlation, and should be offered in addition to
fetal imaging, using ultrasound followed by fetal MRI. We report on our
experience of 15 molecular prenatal diagnoses from chorionic villi or amniotic
fluid sampling. In eight instances, we were able to reassure the parents after
taking into account the absence of the mutation in the fetus, previously
identified before in a parent and/or a proband. Fetal RMI was normal later in
pregnancy, and no child had medical problems after birth. The mutation was found 
in the seven other cases: four children were born, either without brain
malformation and asymptomatic, or had a less severe form than the index case.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20104616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2010 Feb 15;154C(1):133-41. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.30240.

Analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations in human holoprosencephaly.

Solomon BD(1), Mercier S, Vélez JI, Pineda-Alvarez DE, Wyllie A, Zhou N, Dubourg 
C, David V, Odent S, Roessler E, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Since the discovery of the first gene causing holoprosencephaly (HPE), over 500
patients with mutations in genes associated with non-chromosomal, non-syndromic
HPE have been described, with detailed descriptions available in over 300.
Comprehensive clinical analysis of these individuals allows examination for the
presence of genotype-phenotype correlations. These correlations allow a degree of
differentiation between patients with mutations in different HPE-associated genes
and for the application of functional studies to determine intragenic
correlations. These early correlations are an important advance in the
understanding of the clinical aspects of this disease, and in general argue for
continued analysis of the genetic and clinical findings of large cohorts of
patients with rare diseases in order to better inform both basic biological
insight and care and counseling for affected patients and families.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2815217
PMID: 20104608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2010 Feb 15;154C(1):93-101. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.30253.

Current recommendations for the molecular evaluation of newly diagnosed
holoprosencephaly patients.

Pineda-Alvarez DE(1), Dubourg C, David V, Roessler E, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural malformation of the
developing forebrain in humans and is typically characterized by different
degrees of hemispheric separation that are often accompanied by similarly
variable degrees of craniofacial and midline anomalies. HPE is a classic example 
of a complex genetic trait with "pseudo"-autosomal dominant transmission showing 
incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Clinical suspicion of HPE is
typically based upon compatible craniofacial findings, the presence of
developmental delay or seizures, or specific endocrinological abnormalities, and 
is then followed up by confirmation with brain imaging. Once a clinical diagnosis
is made, a thorough genetic evaluation is necessary. This usually includes
analysis of chromosomes by high-resolution karyotyping, clinical assessment to
rule-out well recognized syndromes that are associated with HPE (e.g.,
Pallister-Hall syndrome, Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome and others), and molecular
studies of the most common HPE associated genes (e.g., SHH, ZIC2 and SIX3). In
this review, we provide current step-by-step recommendations that are medically
indicated for the genetic evaluation of patients with newly diagnosed HPE.
Moreover, we provide a brief review of several available methods used in
molecular diagnostics of HPE and describe the advantages and limitations of both 
currently available and future tests as they relate to high throughput screening,
cost, and the results that they may provide.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2815008
PMID: 20104604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Hum Genet. 2010 Apr;127(4):421-40. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0778-7.

Clinical characterization of individuals with deletions of genes in
holoprosencephaly pathways by aCGH refines the phenotypic spectrum of HPE.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Ballif BC, Martin DM, Aylsworth AS, Bejjani BA, Torchia BS,
Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA 99207, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental forebrain anomaly in
humans. Both environmental and genetic factors have been identified to play a
role in the HPE phenotype. Previous studies of the genetic bases of HPE have
taken a phenotype-first approach by examining groups of patients with HPE for
specific mutations or deletions in known or candidate HPE genes. In this study,
we characterized the presence or absence of HPE or a microform in 136 individuals
in which microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) identified a
deletion of one of 35 HPE loci. Frank holoprosencephaly was present in 11
individuals with deletions of one of the common HPE genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and
TGIF1, in one individual with a deletion of the HPE8 locus at 14q13, and in one
individual with a deletion of FGF8, whereas deletions of other HPE loci and
candidate genes (FOXA2 and LRP2) expressed microforms of HPE. Although
individuals with deletions of other HPE candidates (DISP1, LSS, HHIP, SMO, BMP4, 
CDON, CDC42, ACVR2A, OTX2, and WIF1) had clinically significant features, none
had frank HPE or a microform. A search for significant aCGH findings in
individuals referred for testing for HPE revealed a novel association of a
duplication involving GSK3B at 3q13.33 with HPE or a microform, seen in two
unrelated individuals.

PMID: 20066439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Med Genet. 2010 Aug;47(8):513-24. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.073049. Epub 2009 Dec
2.

Mutations in ZIC2 in human holoprosencephaly: description of a novel ZIC2
specific phenotype and comprehensive analysis of 157 individuals.

Solomon BD(1), Lacbawan F, Mercier S, Clegg NJ, Delgado MR, Rosenbaum K, Dubourg 
C, David V, Olney AH, Wehner LE, Hehr U, Bale S, Paulussen A, Smeets HJ, Hardisty
E, Tylki-Szymanska A, Pronicka E, Clemens M, McPherson E, Hennekam RC, Hahn J,
Stashinko E, Levey E, Wieczorek D, Roeder E, Schell-Apacik CC, Booth CW, Thomas
RL, Kenwrick S, Cummings DA, Bous SM, Keaton A, Balog JZ, Hadley D, Zhou N, Long 
R, Vélez JI, Pineda-Alvarez DE, Odent S, Roessler E, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common malformation of the human
forebrain, may be due to mutations in genes associated with non-syndromic HPE.
Mutations in ZIC2, located on chromosome 13q32, are a common cause of
non-syndromic, non-chromosomal HPE.
OBJECTIVE: To characterise genetic and clinical findings in patients with ZIC2
mutations.
METHODS: Through the National Institutes of Health and collaborating centres, DNA
from approximately 1200 individuals with HPE spectrum disorders was analysed for 
sequence variations in ZIC2. Clinical details were examined and all other known
cases of mutations in ZIC2 were included through a literature search.
RESULTS: By direct sequencing of DNA samples of an unselected group of unrelated 
patients with HPE in our NIH laboratory, ZIC2 mutations were found in 8.4%
(49/582) of probands. A total of 157 individuals from 119 unrelated kindreds are 
described, including 141 patients with intragenic sequence determined mutations
in ZIC2. Only 39/157 patients have previously been clinically described. Unlike
HPE due to mutations in other genes, most mutations occur de novo and the
distribution of HPE types differs significantly from that of non-ZIC2 related
HPE. Evidence is presented for the presence of a novel facial phenotype which
includes bitemporal narrowing, upslanting palpebral fissures, a short nose with
anteverted nares, a broad and well demarcated philtrum, and large ears.
CONCLUSIONS: HPE due to ZIC2 mutations is distinct from that due to mutations in 
other genes. This may shed light on the mechanisms involved in formation of the
forebrain and face and will help direct genetic counselling and diagnostic
strategies.

PMCID: PMC3208626
PMID: 19955556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Development. 2009 Nov;136(22):3791-800. doi: 10.1242/dev.037820.

Zebrafish zic2a patterns the forebrain through modulation of Hedgehog-activated
gene expression.

Sanek NA(1), Taylor AA, Nyholm MK, Grinblat Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Anatomy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common congenital malformation of the
forebrain in human. Several genes with essential roles during forebrain
development have been identified because they cause HPE when mutated. Among these
are genes that encode the secreted growth factor Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the
transcription factors Six3 and Zic2. In the mouse, Six3 and Shh activate each
other's transcription, but a role for Zic2 in this interaction has not been
tested. We demonstrate that in zebrafish, as in mouse, Hh signaling activates
transcription of six3b in the developing forebrain. zic2a is also activated by Hh
signaling, and represses six3b non-cell-autonomously, i.e. outside of its own
expression domain, probably through limiting Hh signaling. Zic2a repression of
six3b is essential for the correct formation of the prethalamus. The
diencephalon-derived optic stalk (OS) and neural retina are also patterned in
response to Hh signaling. We show that zebrafish Zic2a limits transcription of
the Hh targets pax2a and fgf8a in the OS and retina. The effects of Zic2a
depletion in the forebrain and in the OS and retina are rescued by blocking Hh
signaling or by increasing levels of the Hh antagonist Hhip, suggesting that in
both tissues Zic2a acts to attenuate the effects of Hh signaling. These data
uncover a novel, essential role for Zic2a as a modulator of Hh-activated gene
expression in the developing forebrain and advance our understanding of a key
gene regulatory network that, when disrupted, causes HPE.

PMCID: PMC2766342
PMID: 19855021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr;136(4):553-9. doi: 10.1007/s00432-009-0689-y.
Epub 2009 Sep 27.

Expression status of Zic family member 2 as a prognostic marker for oral squamous
cell carcinoma.

Sakuma K(1), Kasamatsu A, Yamatoji M, Yamano Y, Fushimi K, Iyoda M, Ogoshi K,
Shinozuka K, Ogawara K, Shiiba M, Tanzawa H, Uzawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, 260-8670, Japan.

PURPOSE: To determine the involvement of ZIC2 in oral squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC).
METHODS: ZIC2 mRNA and protein expression in primary OSCCs (n = 74), oral
premalignant lesions (OPLs, n = 20) and five OSCC-derived cell lines (HSC-2,
HSC-3, OK-92, H1, and Sa3) were analyzed by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot and immunohistochemistry
(IHC). In addition, we evaluated the correlation between ZIC2 IHC scores in OSCCs
and the clinicopathologic status.
RESULTS: Significant up-regulation of ZIC2 was detected in OSCC-derived cell
lines (P < 0.05), primary OSCCs (P < 0.05) and OPLs (P < 0.05) compared with
normal counterparts. Among the clinical variables analyzed, ZIC2 expression was
associated with the histopathologic types of OSCC. Furthermore, the survival
rates differed significantly between ZIC2-positive cases and ZIC2-negative cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that ZIC2 expression is correlated with the 
differentiation type of OSCC and diagnosis and might be a potential prognostic
indicator and therapeutic target for OSCCs.

PMID: 19784848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Genes Dev. 2009 Jun 15;23(12):1461-73. doi: 10.1101/gad.517009.

Zic-associated holoprosencephaly: zebrafish Zic1 controls midline formation and
forebrain patterning by regulating Nodal, Hedgehog, and retinoic acid signaling.

Maurus D(1), Harris WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development, and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3DY, United Kingdom.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most frequently observed human embryonic forebrain
defect. Recent evidence indicates that the two major forms of HPE, classic HPE
and midline interhemispheric (MIH) HPE, are elicited by two different mechanisms.
The only gene known to be associated with both forms of HPE is Zic2. We used the 
zebrafish Danio rerio as a model system to study Zic knockdown during midline
formation by looking at the close homolog Zic1, which is expressed in an
overlapping fashion with Zic2. Zic1 knockdown in zebrafish leads to a strong
midline defect including partial cyclopia due to attenuated Nodal and Hedgehog
signaling in the anterior ventral diencephalon. Strikingly, we were able to show 
that Zic1 is also required for maintaining early forebrain expression of the
retinoic acid (RA)-degrading enzyme cyp26a1. Zic1 LOF leads to increased RA
levels in the forebrain, subsequent ventralization of the optic vesicle and
down-regulation of genes involved in dorsal BMP signaling. Repression of BMP
signaling in dorsal forebrain has been implicated in causing MIH HPE. This work
provides a mechanistical explanation at the molecular level of why Zic factors
are associated with both major forms of HPE.

PMCID: PMC2701571
PMID: 19528322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Cell Sci. 2009 Jun 15;122(Pt 12):2137-48. doi: 10.1242/jcs.043471. Epub 2009
May 26.

A novel genetic mechanism regulates dorsolateral hinge-point formation during
zebrafish cranial neurulation.

Nyholm MK(1), Abdelilah-Seyfried S, Grinblat Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

During neurulation, vertebrate embryos form a neural tube (NT), the rudiment of
the central nervous system. In mammals and birds, a key step in cranial NT
morphogenesis is dorsolateral hinge-point (DLHP) bending, which requires an
apical actomyosin network. The mechanism of DLHP formation is poorly understood, 
although several essential genes have been identified, among them Zic2, which
encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor. We found that DLHP formation in the
zebrafish midbrain also requires actomyosin and Zic function. Given this
conservation, we used the zebrafish to study how genes encoding Zic proteins
regulate DLHP formation. We demonstrate that the ventral zic2a expression border 
predicts DLHP position. Using morpholino (MO) knockdown, we show zic2a and zic5
are required for apical F-actin and active myosin II localization and junction
integrity. Furthermore, myosin II activity can function upstream of junction
integrity during DLHP formation, and canonical Wnt signaling, an activator of zic
gene transcription, is necessary for apical active myosin II localization,
junction integrity and DLHP formation. We conclude that zic genes act downstream 
of Wnt signaling to control cytoskeletal organization, and possibly adhesion,
during neurulation. This study identifies zic2a and zic5 as crucial players in
the genetic network linking patterned gene expression to morphogenetic changes
during neurulation, and strengthens the utility of the zebrafish midbrain as a NT
morphogenesis model.

PMCID: PMC2723160
PMID: 19470582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Hum Mutat. 2009 Aug;30(8):1175-82. doi: 10.1002/humu.21016.

Array-CGH analysis indicates a high prevalence of genomic rearrangements in
holoprosencephaly: an updated map of candidate loci.

Bendavid C(1), Rochard L, Dubourg C, Seguin J, Gicquel I, Pasquier L, Vigneron J,
Laquerrière A, Marcorelles P, Jeanne-Pasquier C, Rouleau C, Jaillard S, Mosser J,
Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Génétique des Pathologies Liées au Développement, UMR 6061 CNRS, IFR140
GFAS, Université de Rennes1, Rennes cedex, France.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most frequent malformation of the brain. To date, 
12 different HPE loci and 8 HPE genes have been identified from recurrent
chromosomal rearrangements or from the sequencing of genes from Nodal and SHH
pathways. Our cohort of HPE patients presents a high genetic heterogeneity. Point
mutations were found in SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF genes in about 20% of cases
(with 10% in SHH). Deletions in these same genes were found in 7.5% of the
patients and 4.4% presented with other subtelomeric gain or losses. Consequently,
the molecular basis of HPE remains unknown in 70% of our cohorts. To detect new
HPE candidate genes, we used array-CGH to refine the previous karyotype based HPE
loci map. We analyzed 111 HPE patients with high-performance Agilent
oligonucleotidic arrays and found that 28 presented anomalies involving known or 
new potential HPE loci located on different chromosomes but with poor redundancy.
This study showed an impressive rate of 19 patients among 111 with de novo
chromosomal anomalies giving evidence that microrearrangements could be a major
molecular mechanism in HPE. Additionally, this study opens new insights on HPE
candidate genes identification giving an updated HPE candidate loci map.

PMID: 19431187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jun;238(6):1358-65. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21885.

Notch signaling downstream of foxD5 promotes neural ectodermal transcription
factors that inhibit neural differentiation.

Yan B(1), Neilson KM, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

We investigated the role of the Notch signaling pathway in regulating several
transcription factors that stabilize a neural fate and expand the neural plate.
Increased Notch signaling in a neural lineage via a constitutively activated form
(NICD) up-regulated geminin and zic2 in a cell-autonomous manner, and expanded
the neural plate domains of sox11, sox2, and sox3. Loss- and gain-of-function
assays show that foxD5 acts upstream of notch1 gene expression. Decreasing Notch 
signaling with an anti-morphic form of a Notch ligand (X-Delta-1(STU)) showed
that the foxD5-mediated expansion of the sox gene neural plate domains requires
Notch signaling. However, geminin and zic2 appear to be dually regulated by foxD5
and Notch1 signaling. These studies demonstrate that: (1) Notch signaling acts
downstream of foxD5 to promote the expression of a subset of neural ectodermal
transcription factors; and (2) Notch signaling and the foxD5 transcriptional
pathway together maintain the neural plate in an undifferentiated state.
Developmental Dynamics 238:1358-1365, 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2692561
PMID: 19253404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Biol. 2009 May 1;329(1):80-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.019. Epub 2009
Feb 26.

foxD5 plays a critical upstream role in regulating neural ectodermal fate and the
onset of neural differentiation.

Yan B(1), Neilson KM, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, D.C. 20037, USA.

foxD5 is expressed in the nascent neural ectoderm concomitant with several other 
neural-fate specifying transcription factors. We used loss-of-function and
gain-of-function approaches to analyze the functional position of foxD5 amongst
these other factors. Loss of FoxD5 reduces the expression of sox2, sox11, soxD,
zic1, zic3 and Xiro1-3 at the onset of gastrulation, and of geminin, sox3 and
zic2, which are maternally expressed, by late gastrulation. At neural plate
stages most of these genes remain reduced, but the domains of zic1 and zic3 are
expanded. Increased FoxD5 induces geminin and zic2, weakly represses sox11 at
early gastrula but later (st12) induces it; weakly represses sox2 and sox3
transiently and strongly represses soxD, zic1, zic3 and Xiro1-3. The foxD5
effects on zic1, zic3 and Xiro1-3 involve transcriptional repression, whereas
those on geminin and zic2 involve transcriptional activation. foxD5's effects on 
geminin, sox11 and zic2 occur at the onset of gastrulation, whereas the other
genes require earlier foxD5 activity. geminin, sox11 and zic2, each of which is
up-regulated directly by foxD5, are all required to account for foxD5 phenotypes,
indicating that this triad constitutes a transcriptional network rather than
linear path that coordinately up-regulates genes that promote an immature neural 
fate and inhibits genes that promote the onset of neural differentiation. We also
show that foxD5 promotes an ectopic neural fate in the epidermis by reducing BMP 
signaling. Several of the genes that are repressed by foxD5 in turn reduce foxD5 
expression, contributing to the medial-lateral patterning of the neural plate.

PMCID: PMC2672197
PMID: 19250931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2008 Nov;48(11):815-20.

[Toward a future research in neurology: molecular analysis of brain disorder].

[Article in Japanese]

Mikoshiba K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lab. for Developmental Neurobiology Neuro-Developmental Disorder Research
Group, RIKEN Brain Science Institute.

Brain is highly organized organ important for learning and memory, emotion and
behavior in social life. We are confronted to suffering from various brain
disorders. I here present some of the research strategy for the analysis of brain
disorder by molecular technique to find ways to cure the disorders. It is
surprising to know that the important molecules involved in development and
differentiation of the brain are all involved in the neurodegenerative disorder
or neuropsychiatric disorders. I here stress the importance of the collaborative 
approach with other fields to analyze the brain structure and function at various
levels at molecule-cell-tissue-organ-body-society.

PMID: 19198090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Mutat. 2009 Apr;30(4):E541-54. doi: 10.1002/humu.20982.

The full spectrum of holoprosencephaly-associated mutations within the ZIC2 gene 
in humans predicts loss-of-function as the predominant disease mechanism.

Roessler E(1), Lacbawan F, Dubourg C, Paulussen A, Herbergs J, Hehr U, Bendavid
C, Zhou N, Ouspenskaia M, Bale S, Odent S, David V, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Mutations of the ZIC2 transcription factor gene are among the most common
heterozygous variations detected in holoprosencephaly (HPE) patients, a patient
group who lack critical midline forebrain specification due to defective
embryonic signaling during development. Recent studies indicate that complete
deficiency of the related murine Zic2 transcription factor can also be a
contributing factor to variable midline deficiencies, presenting during
mid-gastrulation, that could explain similar forebrain anomalies in this model
system. Here we collect and summarize all available mutations in the human ZIC2
gene detected in HPE patients (21 published and 62 novel). Our analysis
corroborates this mechanism proposed in mice by predicting loss-of-function as
the likely pathogenetic mechanism common to most, if not all, of these mutations 
in HPE.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2674582
PMID: 19177455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Jan-Feb;52(1):41-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.10.002. Epub
2008 Oct 31.

Twelve new patients with 13q deletion syndrome: genotype-phenotype analyses in
progress.

Quélin C(1), Bendavid C, Dubourg C, de la Rochebrochard C, Lucas J, Henry C,
Jaillard S, Loget P, Loeuillet L, Lacombe D, Rival JM, David V, Odent S, Pasquier
L.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôpital Sud, Rennes Cedex 2, France.

13q deletion is characterized by a wide phenotypic spectrum resulting from a
partial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 13. The main clinical features are
mental retardation, growth retardation, craniofacial dysmorphy and various
congenital defects. Only one recent Italian study was aimed at determining
genotype-phenotype correlations among 13q deletions from a group of mainly live
born children, using array-CGH and FISH. In order to improve the molecular
characterization of 13q monosomy, 12 new patients (9 foetuses and 3 children)
were collected based on a cohort of holoprosencephaly (HPE) linked to ZIC2 gene
deletion and/or patients with 13q deletion diagnosed by standard karyotype.
First, quantitative gene screening using MLPA (Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe
Amplification) was performed to look for ZIC2 gene deletion and then, CGH array
analysis was carried out using the Agilent Human Genome CGH microarray 4x44K
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). All the foetuses had severe cerebral
midline malformations associated with a deletion including the ZIC2 gene. We
report one patient with Steinfeld phenotype linked to this chromosomal anomaly,
and suggest that some of the associations between cerebral midline malformation
and limb defects might be related to 13q deletion. Further candidate genes are
suspected to explain the malformations associated with cerebral anomalies in the 
hypothesis of a contiguous gene syndrome: SPRY2 in 13q31.1 is implicated in lens 
cell proliferation and differentiation for congenital cataract; GPC5 in 13q32 is 
mainly expressed in the mesenchyme of the developing limb bud for upper limb
anomalies.

PMID: 19022413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4081-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.023572. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Foxg1 regulates retinal axon pathfinding by repressing an ipsilateral program in 
nasal retina and by causing optic chiasm cells to exert a net axonal
growth-promoting activity.

Tian NM(1), Pratt T, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, The University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK.

Mammalian binocular vision relies on the divergence of retinal ganglion cell
axons at the optic chiasm, with strictly controlled numbers projecting
contralaterally and ipsilaterally. In mouse, contralateral projections arise from
the entire retina, whereas ipsilateral projections arise from ventrotemporal
retina. We investigate how development of these patterns of projection is
regulated by the contralateral determinant Foxg1, a forkhead box transcription
factor expressed in nasal retina and at the chiasm. In nasal retina, loss of
Foxg1 causes increased numbers of ipsilateral projections and ectopic expression 
of the ipsilateral determinants Zic2, Ephb1 and Foxd1, indicating that nasal
retina is competent to express an ipsilateral program that is normally suppressed
by Foxg1. Using co-cultures that combine Foxg1-expressing with Foxg1-null retinal
explants and chiasm cells, we provide functional evidence that Foxg1 promotes
contralateral projections through actions in nasal retina, and that in chiasm
cells, Foxg1 is required for the generation of a hitherto unrecognized activity
supporting RGC axon growth.

PMID: 19004857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Development. 2008 Nov;135(21):3531-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.023663. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Autonomous and non-autonomous Shh signalling mediate the in vivo growth and
guidance of mouse retinal ganglion cell axons.

Sánchez-Camacho C(1), Bovolenta P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurobiología Molecular Celular y del Desarrollo, Instituto
Cajal, CSIC and CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) 37, Madrid 28002, Spain.

In non-mammalian vertebrates, the relatively homogeneous population of retinal
ganglion cells (RGCs) differentiates and projects entirely to the contralateral
side of the brain under the influence of sonic hedgehog (Shh). In mammals, by
contrast, there are two different RGC types: the Zic2-positive ipsilateral
projecting and the Isl2-positive contralateral projecting. We asked whether the
axons of these two populations respond to Shh and if their response differs. We
have also analysed whether midline- and RGC-derived Shh contributes to the growth
of the axons in the proximal visual pathway. We show that these two RGC types are
characterised by a differential expression of Shh signalling components and that 
they respond differently to Shh when challenged in vitro. In vivo blockade of Shh
activity, however, alters the path and distribution mostly of the contralateral
projecting RGC axons at the chiasm, indicating that midline-derived Shh
participates in funnelling contralateral visual fibres in this region.
Furthermore, interference with Shh signalling in the RGCs themselves causes
abnormal growth and navigation of contralateral projecting axons in the proximal 
portion of the pathway, highlighting a novel cell-autonomous mechanism by which
Shh can influence growth cone behaviour.

PMID: 18832395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Jan;9(1):43-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.08.002. Epub 2008
Aug 12.

Zic2 is expressed in pluripotent cells in the blastocyst and adult brain
expression overlaps with makers of neurogenesis.

Brown L(1), Brown S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, University of Vermont, Gynecology and Reproductive
Sciences, Burlington, Vermont 05401, USA.

Members of the zic family of transcription factors are widely understood to act
during neural patterning and neural crest development. In particular, studies in 
mice and humans have shown that Zic2 has a role in forebrain patterning, while
studies in Xenopus and zebrafish have shown that Zic2 acts during gastrulation.
Expression of Zic2 prior to gastrulation has not been reported in the mouse. In
the adult, Zic2 is known to be strongly expressed in cerebellar granule cells,
but expression elsewhere in the adult brain has not been reported. We present
data showing that Zic2 is expressed in pluripotent cells during very early mouse 
development. Further, in the adult brain, Zic2 expression is broad and overlaps
with markers of neurogenesis. The presence of Zic2 in pluripotent cells of the
embryo as well as in dividing neural cells in the adult suggests that this
transcription factor may have a role in maintaining pluripotency.

PMID: 18755297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2008 Jul;37(7):594-7.

Holoprosencephaly: an antenatally-diagnosed case series and subject review.

Lim AS(1), Lim TH, Kee SK, Chia P, Raman S, Eu EL, Lim JY, Tien SL.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, 
Singapore. alvin.lim.s.t@sgh.com.sg

INTRODUCTION: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is an uncommon congenital failure of
forebrain development. Although the aetiology is heterogeneous, chromosomal
abnormalities or a monogenic defect are the major causes, accounting for about
40% to 50% of HPE cases. At least 7 genes have been positively implicated,
including SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, PTCH1, GLI2, and TDGF1.
CLINICAL PICTURE: Twelve antenatally- and 1 postnatally-diagnosed cases are
presented in this study. These comprised 6 amniotic fluid, 3 chorionic villus, 2 
fetal blood, 1 peripheral blood, and 1 product of conception.
OUTCOME: The total chromosome abnormality rate was 92.3%, comprising
predominantly trisomy 13 (66.7%). There was 1 case of trisomy 18, and 3 cases of 
structural abnormalities, including del13q, del18p, and add4q.
CONCLUSION: Despite the poor outcome of an antenatally-diagnosed HPE and the
likely decision by parents to opt for a termination of pregnancy, karyotyping
and/or genetic studies should be performed to determine if a specific familial
genetic or chromosomal abnormality is the cause. At the very least, a detailed
chromosome analysis should be carried out on the affected individual. If the
result of high resolution karyotyping is normal, Fluorescence in situ
hybridisation (FISH) and/or syndrome-specific testing or isolated
holoprosencephaly genetic testing may be performed. This information can be
useful in making a prognosis and predicting the risk of recurrence.

PMID: 18695774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Neuroimmunol. 2008 Sep 15;201-202:163-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.01.018.
Epub 2008 Jul 21.

ZIC antibodies in paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration and small cell lung
cancer.

Sabater L(1), Bataller L, Suárez-Calvet M, Saiz A, Dalmau J, Graus F.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Neurology Hospital Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona and Institut d'
Investigació Biomèdica August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

Patients with isolated ZIC4 antibodies usually have paraneoplastic cerebellar
degeneration (PCD) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC) but the frequency is
unknown. We analyzed the presence of ZIC1, ZIC2 and ZIC4 antibodies in 27
patients with PCD and SCLC negative for other onconeural antibodies. ZIC
antibodies were detected in nitrocellulose filters with phage plaques. Four (15%)
PCD sera recognized ZIC2. Three of these positive sera also reacted with ZIC1 and
two with ZIC4. Our study suggests that 1) the incidence of isolated ZIC
antibodies is low in PCD patients and SCLC and 2) ZIC antibodies are probably
directed to epitopes shared by the three ZIC proteins.

PMCID: PMC2582201
PMID: 18639938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Oct 1;17(19):2986-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn197. Epub 2008 Jul 
9.

Zic2-associated holoprosencephaly is caused by a transient defect in the
organizer region during gastrulation.

Warr N(1), Powles-Glover N, Chappell A, Robson J, Norris D, Arkell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Early Development, Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell, Oxfordshire OX11 0RD,
UK.

The putative transcription factor ZIC2 is associated with a defect of forebrain
development, known as Holoprosencephaly (HPE), in humans and mouse, yet the
mechanism by which aberrant ZIC2 function causes classical HPE is unexplained.
The zinc finger domain of all mammalian Zic genes is highly homologous with that 
of the Gli genes, which are transcriptional mediators of Shh signalling.
Mutations in Shh and many other Hh pathway members cause HPE and it has been
proposed that Zic2 acts within the Shh pathway to cause HPE. We have investigated
the embryological cause of Zic2-associated HPE and the relationship between Zic2 
and the Shh pathway using mouse genetics. We show that Zic2 does not interact
with Shh to produce HPE. Moreover, molecular defects that are able to account for
the HPE phenotype are present in Zic2 mutants before the onset of Shh signalling.
Mutation of Zic2 causes HPE via a transient defect in the function of the
organizer region at mid-gastrulation which causes an arrest in the development of
the prechordal plate (PCP), a structure required for forebrain midline
morphogenesis. The analysis provides genetic evidence that Zic2 functions during 
organizer formation and that the PCP develops via a multi-step process.

PMID: 18617531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):92-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.034. Epub 2008
May 8.

FGF8 signaling patterns the telencephalic midline by regulating putative key
factors of midline development.

Okada T(1), Okumura Y, Motoyama J, Ogawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell Culture Development, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan. toshiokada@brain.riken.jp

FGF8 has been reported to act as a primary regulator of neocortical patterning
along the anteroposterior (AP) axis in the mouse telencephalon, and disruption of
FGF signaling causes distortion of molecular arealization along the AP axis.
Since hypoplasia of midline structures is observed in Fgf8 mutant mice, FGF8 is
also postulated to be involved in telencephalic midline development. In this
study we analyzed the role of FGF8 in midline development by means of
gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments. The results showed that FGF8
up-regulates the expression of transcription factor (TF) genes, including
putative key factors involved in midline development. Although FGF8 had been
thought to act downstream of SHH signaling, ectopic FGF8 up-regulates the
expression of midline TF genes in Shh null mice, suggesting that FGF signaling
acts as an upstream positive regulator of midline TFs during midline development 
independently of SHH.

PMID: 18547559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Neurosci. 2008 Jun 4;28(23):5910-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0632-08.2008.

Zic2 regulates retinal ganglion cell axon avoidance of ephrinB2 through inducing 
expression of the guidance receptor EphB1.

Lee R(1), Petros TJ, Mason CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA. rl2159@columbia.edu

The navigation of retinal axons to ipsilateral and contralateral targets in the
brain depends on the decision to cross or avoid the midline at the optic chiasm, 
a critical guidance maneuver that establishes the binocular visual pathway.
Previous work has identified a specific guidance receptor, EphB1, that mediates
the repulsion of uncrossed axons away from its ligand, ephrinB2, at the optic
chiasm midline (Williams et al., 2003), and a transcription factor Zic2, that,
like EphB1, is required for formation of the ipsilateral retinal projection
(Herrera et al., 2003). Although the reported similarities in localization
implicated that Zic2 regulates EphB1 (Herrera et al., 2003; Williams et al.,
2003; Pak et al., 2004), whether Zic2 drives expression of EphB1 protein has not 
been elucidated. Here we show that EphB1 protein is expressed in the growth cones
of axons from ventrotemporal (VT) retina that project ipsilaterally and that
repulsion by ephrinB2 is determined by the presence of this receptor on growth
cones. Moreover, ectopic delivery of Zic2 into explants from non-VT retina
induces expression of EphB1 mRNA and protein. The upregulated EphB1 receptor
protein is localized to growth cones and is functional, because it is sufficient 
to change retinal ganglion cell axon behavior from extension onto, to avoidance
of, ephrinB2 substrates. Our results demonstrate that Zic2 upregulates EphB1
expression and define a link between a transcription factor and expression of a
guidance receptor protein essential for axon guidance at the vertebrate midline.

PMCID: PMC3844771
PMID: 18524895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Neurosci. 2008 Apr 30;28(18):4712-25. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5735-07.2008.

Zic deficiency in the cortical marginal zone and meninges results in cortical
lamination defects resembling those in type II lissencephaly.

Inoue T(1), Ogawa M, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis (Behavioral and Developmental
Disorders), RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The formation of the highly organized cortical structure depends on the
production and correct placement of the appropriate number and types of neurons. 
The Zic family of zinc-finger transcription factors plays essential roles in
regulating the proliferation and differentiation of neuronal progenitors in the
medial forebrain and the cerebellum. Examination of the expression of Zic genes
demonstrated that Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 were expressed by the progenitor cells in 
the septum and cortical hem, the sites of generation of the Cajal-Retzius (CR)
cells. Immunohistochemical studies have revealed that Zic proteins were
abundantly expressed in the meningeal cells and that the majority of the CR cells
distributed in the medial and dorsal cortex also expressed Zic proteins in the
mid-late embryonic and postnatal cortical marginal zones. During embryonic
cortical development, Zic1/Zic3 double-mutant and hypomorphic Zic2 mutant mice
showed a reduction in the number of CR cells in the rostral cortex, whereas the
cell number remained unaffected in the caudal cortex. These mutants also showed
mislocalization of the CR cells and cortical lamination defects, resembling the
changes noted in type II (cobblestone) lissencephaly, throughout the brain. In
the Zic1/3 mutant, reduced proliferation of the meningeal cells was observed
before the thinner and disrupted organization of the pial basement membrane (BM) 
with reduced expression of the BM components and the meningeal cell-derived
secretory factor. These defects correlated with the changes in the end feet
morphology of the radial glial cells. These findings indicate that the Zic genes 
play critical roles in cortical development through regulating the proliferation 
of meningeal cells and the pial BM assembly.

PMID: 18448648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Med Rep. 2008 May-Jun;1(3):443-6.

No association of the polyhistidine tract polymorphism of the ZIC2 gene with
neural tube defects in a South American (ECLAMC) population.

Costa-Lima MA(1), Meneses HN, El-Jaick KB, Amorim MR, Castilla EE, Orioli IM.

Author information: 
(1)Estudo Latino Americano de Malformações Congênitas (ECLAMC) at Departamento de
Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Ilha do Fundão 21949-570,
Argentina.

The ZIC genes comprise a family of transcriptional factors associated with neural
tube defects (NTDs) in mice and with holoprosencephaly in humans. An allelic
variant of ZIC2, a CAC repeat within the first exon, was reported in association 
with an increased risk of non-syndromic NTDs in patients with a Hispanic ethnic
background. We investigated whether this 10-residue histidine tract polymorphism 
of the ZIC2 gene (c.718_720dupCAC) was associated with the risk of NTDs in a
sample of 138 patients and their parents from the Latin American Collaborative
Study of Congenital Malformations (ECLAMC) hospital network. Analysis with
log-linear models of 138 family triads of mother, father and affected child did
not provide evidence to support the notion that case (or maternal) 10H/10H or
-/10H genotypes were associated with NTDs in this South American population
sample, where the 10H variant occurred in 5% of newborns affected with NTDs. We
also described the first example of the homozygous state of the 10H allele in a
patient with cephalocele, holoprosencephaly and microphthalmia, but did not
ascertain whether this polymorphism is associated with the increased risk of a
specific subgroup of NTDs, as a normal father of a patient with anencephaly
presented the same genotype.

PMID: 21479430  [PubMed]


104. Development. 2008 May;135(10):1833-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.020693. Epub 2008 Apr 16.

Zic2 promotes axonal divergence at the optic chiasm midline by EphB1-dependent
and -independent mechanisms.

García-Frigola C(1), Carreres MI, Vegar C, Mason C, Herrera E.

Author information: 
(1)Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Miguel Hernández, 
CSIC-UMH Juan, Avd. Ramón y Cajal s/n, Alicante 03550, Spain.

Axons of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) make a divergent choice at the optic
chiasm to cross or avoid the midline in order to project to ipsilateral and
contralateral targets, thereby establishing the binocular visual pathway. The
zinc-finger transcription factor Zic2 and a member of the Eph family of receptor 
tyrosine kinases, EphB1, are both essential for proper development of the
ipsilateral projection at the mammalian optic chiasm midline. Here, we
demonstrate in mouse by functional experiments in vivo that Zic2 is not only
required but is also sufficient to change the trajectory of RGC axons from
crossed to uncrossed. In addition, our results reveal that this transcription
factor regulates the expression of EphB1 in RGCs and also suggest the existence
of an additional EphB1-independent pathway controlled by Zic2 that contributes to
retinal axon divergence at the midline.

PMID: 18417618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Zebrafish. 2004;1(3):239-56. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2004.1.239.

Ventralized zebrafish embryo rescue by overexpression of Zic2a.

Dodou E(1), Barald KF, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA.

The neuroectoderm arises during gastrulation as a population of undifferentiated 
proliferating neuroepithelial cells. As development continues, neuroepithelial
cells leave the cell cycle and differentiate into neurons and glia of the
functioning central nervous system. What processes establish the spatial
distribution of proliferating neuroepithelial cells? To investigate this
question, zic2a was isolated from zebrafish, a homolog of the Drosophila
pair-rule gene odd-paired, which is involved in nervous system patterning. At
shield stage, zic2a was expressed in the zebrafish organizer and the blastoderm
margin, and became restricted to the axial mesoderm in mid-gastrula. Expression
of zic2a appeared in the prospective neuroectoderm during gastrulation, and later
demarcated the presumptive forebrain. This expression pattern suggests that zic2a
may function early in the organizer and later in the neural plate to demarcate
the population of proliferating neuroectoderm. Consistent with a function for
zic2a in transducing signals from the organizer, overexpression of zic2a resulted
in an expansion of proliferating neuroectoderm. Furthermore, zic2a overexpression
rescued the ventralized phenotype of chordino mutant embryos, which lack a
functional chordin gene. Early expression of zic2 in the zebrafish organizer, and
the phenotype resulting from overexpression, show a role for zic2a downstream of 
chordin or other secreted organizer proteins in establishing the initial size of 
the population of neuroectoderm cells.

PMID: 18248235  [PubMed]


106. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Mar-Apr;51(2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.08.004. Epub
2007 Sep 15.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly syndrome: in search of an etiology.

Cordero DR(1), Bendavid C, Shanske AL, Haddad BR, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly (HPS) or Pseudotrisomy 13 syndrome are names
conferred to clinically categorize patients whose phenotype is congruent with
Trisomy 13 in the context of a normal karyotype. The literature suggests that
this entity may be secondary to submicroscopic deletions in holoprosencephaly
(HPE) genes; however, a limited number of investigations have been undertaken to 
evaluate this hypothesis. To test this hypothesis we studied a patient with HPE, 
polydactyly, and craniofacial dysmorphologies consistent with the diagnosis of
Trisomy 13 whose karyotype was normal. We performed mutational analysis in the
four main HPE causing genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, and ZIC2) and GLI3, a gene
associated with polydactyly as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
to search for microdeletions in these genes and two candidate HPE genes (DISP1
and FOXA2). No mutations or deletions were detected. A whole genome approach
utilizing array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) to screen for copy
number abnormalities was then taken. No loss or gain of DNA was noted. Although a
single case, our results suggest that coding mutations in these HPE genes and
copy number anomalies may not be causative in this disorder. Instead, HPS likely 
involves mutations in other genes integral in embryonic development of the
forebrain, face and limbs. Our systematic analysis sets the framework to study
other affected children and delineate the molecular etiology of this disorder.

PMCID: PMC2441840
PMID: 18178536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. FEBS Lett. 2008 Jan 23;582(2):154-8. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Functional role of Zic2 phosphorylation in transcriptional regulation.

Ishiguro A(1), Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. akiraishiguro@brain.riken.jp

Zic2 is a transcriptional activator that plays a crucial role in mammalian
forebrain development. It activates the transcription of target genes by DNA
binding and recruitment of RNA helicase A (RHA). We recently reported that the
Zic2-RHA interaction is decreased by phosphatase treatment in vitro. We have now 
identified the phosphorylation site (serine 200) in mouse Zic2. Zic2S200A was
defective in RHA-binding, and its transcriptional activation ability was
diminished. These data indicate that Zic2S200 is a target for phosphorylation by 
DNA-dependent protein kinase, regulating Zic2-mediated transcriptional
activation.

PMID: 18068128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Neurobiol. 2008 Jan;68(1):83-100.

Ongoing sonic hedgehog signaling is required for dorsal midline formation in the 
developing forebrain.

Hayhurst M(1), Gore BB, Tessier-Lavigne M, McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA.

The division of the mammalian forebrain into distinct left and right hemispheres 
represents a critical step in neural development. Several signaling molecules
including sonic hedgehog (SHH), fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8), and bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have been implicated in dorsal midline development,
and prior work suggests that the organizing centers from which these proteins are
secreted mutually regulate one another during development. To explore the role of
the ventral organizing center in the formation of two hemispheres, we assessed
dorsal midline development in Shh mutant embryos and in wildtype embryos treated 
with the SHH signaling inhibitor HhAntag. Collectively, our findings demonstrate 
that SHH signaling plays an important role in maintaining the normal expression
patterns of Fgf8 and Bmp4 in the developing forebrain. We further show that FGF8 
can induce the expression of Zic2, which is normally expressed at the midline and
is required in vivo for hemispheric cleavage, suggesting that FGF signaling may
stimulate dorsal midline development by inducing Zic2 expression.

PMID: 17948241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Clin Dysmorphol. 2007 Oct;16(4):247-52.

Midline defects in deletion 18p syndrome: clinical and molecular characterization
of three patients.

Portnoï MF(1), Gruchy N, Marlin S, Finkel L, Denoyelle F, Dubourg C, Odent S,
Siffroi JP, Le Bouc Y, Houang M.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, AP-HP, Saint-Antoine's Hospital, Pierre and Marie
Curie University, Paris, France. marie-france.portnoi@sat.aphp.fr

The phenotype of monosomy 18p varies widely, the main clinical manifestations
being mental and growth retardation, and craniofacial dysmorphism. Clinical
features also include growth hormone (GH) deficiency, or holoprosencephaly (HPE).
Haploinsufficiency for TGIF, mapped to 18p11.3, is not generally sufficient to
cause HPE. To perform a genotype-phenotype correlation, and delineate the region 
involved in GH deficiency, we carried out a molecular characterization of the 18p
deletions, in three patients with midline defects. Two unrelated children, a
7-month-old girl and a 2-month-old boy had del(18p) syndrome and GH deficiency.
In addition, the boy had HPE. HPE genes, SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF, were tested
by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and quantitative multiplex
of PCR short fluorescent fragments analyses. A deletion of TGIF was confirmed,
without any associated mutation for the tested HPE genes, suggesting the role of 
other genetic or environmental factors. The third patient was his moderately
retarded mother. A set of chromosome 18p-specific BACs clones was used as
fluorescence in-situ hybridization probes to define the breakpoints. Recently, it
was found that there seem to be a breakpoint cluster in the centromeric region at
18p11.1, which was not observed in our patients. The girl was found to have a
deletion of 10.3 Mb, with a breakpoint in 18p11.22. The boy and his mother had a 
smaller deletion (8 Mb), with a breakpoint in 18p11.23. These findings suggest
that the distal region on 18p is involved in the main clinical features, and GH
deficiency, in 18p deletions.

PMID: 17786116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Development. 2007 Sep;134(17):3203-11.

Neural plate morphogenesis during mouse neurulation is regulated by antagonism of
Bmp signalling.

Ybot-Gonzalez P(1), Gaston-Massuet C, Girdler G, Klingensmith J, Arkell R, Greene
ND, Copp AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Development Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK. p.ybot-gonzalez@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Dorsolateral bending of the neural plate, an undifferentiated pseudostratified
epithelium, is essential for neural tube closure in the mouse spinal region. If
dorsolateral bending fails, spina bifida results. In the present study, we
investigated the molecular signals that regulate the formation of dorsolateral
hinge points (DLHPs). We show that Bmp2 expression correlates with upper spinal
neurulation (in which DLHPs are absent); that Bmp2-null embryos exhibit
premature, exaggerated DLHPs; and that the local release of Bmp2 inhibits neural 
fold bending. Therefore, Bmp signalling is necessary and sufficient to inhibit
DLHPs. By contrast, the Bmp antagonist noggin is expressed dorsally in neural
folds containing DLHPs, noggin-null embryos show markedly reduced dorsolateral
bending and local release of noggin stimulates bending. Hence, Bmp antagonism is 
both necessary and sufficient to induce dorsolateral bending. The local release
of Shh suppresses dorsal noggin expression, explaining the absence of DLHPs at
high spinal levels, where notochordal expression of Shh is strong. DLHPs ;break
through' at low spinal levels, where Shh expression is weaker. Zic2 mutant
embryos fail to express Bmp antagonists dorsally and lack DLHPs, developing
severe spina bifida. Our findings reveal a molecular mechanism based on
antagonism of Bmp signalling that underlies the regulation of DLHP formation
during mouse spinal neural tube closure.

PMID: 17693602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2007;22(5):389-93. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Discordant semilobar holoprosencephaly in monozygotic twins with de novo inv
dup(15) marker chromosome and de novo mutation on SHH gene.

Peng HH(1), Kuo PL, Chao AS, Wang TH, Chang YL, Soong YK, Chang SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Lin-ko 
Medical Center, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

We present a 30-year-old woman with a twin pregnancy, 1 fetus displaying a small 
head circumference, semilobar holoprosencephaly, and cleft lip as detected by
ultrasound at 23 weeks of gestation. Fetal magnetic resonance imaging confirmed
the diagnosis of semilobar holoprosencephaly. The other twin, however, had an
appropriate fetal growth, devoid of any major structural anomalies. Karyotyping
by G-banding of amniocentesis specimens in both fetuses showed 47,XY,+mar.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed in the marker chromosome positive
dicentric signals for the chromosome 15 centromere-specific alpha satellite DNA
probe (D15Z1) and negative signals for the SNRPN probe (15q11-13), thus
establishing a cytogenetic diagnosis of 47,XX,+mar.ish
idic(15)(q11-q13)(D15Z1++,SNRPN-) for both fetuses. The parental karyotypes were 
normal. The fetuses, therefore, had a de novo inv dup(15) marker chromosome
without involvement of the Prader-Willi region. Short tandem repeat markers
(total 15 markers) confirmed that the fetuses were monozygotic twins. Short
tandem repeat markers at the 15q region (total 6 markers) excluded the
possibility of uniparental disomy (15) mat or uniparental disomy (15) pat.
Molecular study in both fetuses of TGIF, SHH, SIX3, and ZIC2 genes revealed a
heterozygous 1085 C > T (Ser 362 Leu) on the SHH gene, but a homozygous 1085 C > 
C (Ser 362 Ser) for both parents on the SHH gene. The couple decided to terminate
the pregnancy at 26 weeks of gestation. To our knowledge, this is the first
report of semilobar holoprosencephaly with inv dup(15) marker chromosome and
missense SHH gene mutation 1085 C > T (Ser 362 Leu).

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17556830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 15;306(2):669-84. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Zic2 and Zic3 synergistically control neurulation and segmentation of paraxial
mesoderm in mouse embryo.

Inoue T(1), Ota M, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic family zinc-finger proteins play various roles in animal development. In
mice, five Zic genes (Zic1-5) have been reported. Despite the partly overlapping 
expression profiles of these genes, mouse mutants for each Zic show distinct
phenotypes. To uncover possible redundant roles, we characterized Zic2/Zic3
compound mutant mice. Zic2 and Zic3 are both expressed in presomitic mesoderm,
forming and newly generated somites with differential spatiotemporal
accentuation. Mice heterozygous for the hypomorphic Zic2 allele together with
null Zic3 allele generally showed severe malformations of the axial skeleton,
including asymmetric or rostro-caudally bridged vertebrae, and reduction of the
number of caudal vertebral bones, that are not obvious in single mutants. These
defects were preceded by perturbed somitic marker expression, and reduced
paraxial mesoderm progenitors in the primitive streak. These results suggest that
Zic2 and Zic3 cooperatively control the segmentation of paraxial mesoderm at
multiple stages. In addition to the segmentation abnormality, the compound mutant
also showed neural tube defects that ran the entire rostro-caudal extent
(craniorachischisis), suggesting that neurulation is another developmental
process where Zic2 and Zic3 have redundant functions.

PMID: 17490632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(7):e51. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Array-based profiling of reference-independent methylation status (aPRIMES)
identifies frequent promoter methylation and consecutive downregulation of ZIC2
in pediatric medulloblastoma.

Pfister S(1), Schlaeger C, Mendrzyk F, Wittmann A, Benner A, Kulozik A, Scheurlen
W, Radlwimmer B, Lichter P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Existing microarray-based approaches for screening of DNA methylation are
hampered by a number of shortcomings, such as the introduction of bias by DNA
copy-number imbalances in the test genome and negligence of tissue-specific
methylation patterns. We developed a method designated array-based profiling of
reference-independent methylation status (aPRIMES) that allows the detection of
direct methylation status rather than relative methylation. Array-PRIMES is based
on the differential restriction and competitive hybridization of methylated and
unmethylated DNA by methylation-specific and methylation-sensitive restriction
enzymes, respectively. We demonstrate the accuracy of aPRIMES in detecting the
methylation status of CpG islands for different states of methylation.
Application of aPRIMES to the DNA from desmoplastic medulloblastomas of
monozygotic twins showed strikingly similar methylation profiles. Additional
analysis of 18 sporadic medulloblastomas revealed an overall correlation between 
highly methylated tumors and poor clinical outcome and identified ZIC2 as a
frequently methylated gene in pediatric medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC1874664
PMID: 17344319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 20;104(8):2997-3002. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

Differentiation of ES cells into cerebellar neurons.

Salero E(1), Hatten ME.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, The Rockefeller University, 1230
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021-6399, USA.

The neuronal circuits of the cerebellar cortex are essential for motor and
sensory learning, associative memory formation, and the vestibular ocular reflex.
In children and young adults, tumors of the granule cell, the medulloblastomas,
represent 40% of brain tumors. We report the differentiation of E14 ES cells into
mature granule neurons by sequential treatment with secreted factors (WNT1, FGF8,
and RA) that initiate patterning in the cerebellar region of the neural tube,
bone morphogenic proteins (BMP6/7 and GDF7) that induce early granule cell
progenitor markers (MATH1, MEIS1, ZIC1), mitogens (SHH, JAG1) that control
proliferation and induce additional granule cell markers (Cyclin D2, PAX2/6), and
culture in glial-conditioned medium to induce markers of mature granule neurons
(GABAalpha(6)r), including ZIC2, a unique marker for granule neurons.
Differentiated ES cells formed classic "T-shaped" granule cell axons in vitro,
and implantation of differentiated Pde1c-Egfp-BAC transgenic ES cells into the
external granule cell layer of neonatal mice resulted in the extension of
parallel fibers, migration across the molecular layer, incorporation into the
internal granule cell layer, and extension of short dendrites, typical of young
granule cells forming synaptic connections with afferent mossy fibers. These
results underscore the utility of treating ES cells with local, inductive signals
that regulate CNS neuronal development in vivo as a strategy for cell replacement
therapy of defined neuronal populations.

PMCID: PMC1796781
PMID: 17293457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Feb 2;2:8.

Holoprosencephaly.

Dubourg C(1), Bendavid C, Pasquier L, Henry C, Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 6061 CNRS, Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Université de
Rennes1, IFR 140 GFAS, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, 35000, France.
christele.dubourg@chu-rennes.fr

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a complex brain malformation resulting from incomplete
cleavage of the prosencephalon, occurring between the 18th and the 28th day of
gestation and affecting both the forebrain and the face. It is estimated to occur
in 1/16,000 live births and 1/250 conceptuses. Three ranges of increasing
severity are described: lobar, semi-lobar and alobar HPE. Another milder subtype 
of HPE called middle interhemispheric variant (MIHF) or syntelencephaly is also
reported. In most of the cases, facial anomalies are observed in HPE, like
cyclopia, proboscis, median or bilateral cleft lip/palate in severe forms, ocular
hypotelorism or solitary median maxillary central incisor in minor forms. These
latter midline defects can occur without the cerebral malformations and then are 
called microforms. Children with HPE have many medical problems: developmental
delay and feeding difficulties, epilepsy, instability of temperature, heart rate 
and respiration. Endocrine disorders like diabetes insipidus, adrenal hypoplasia,
hypogonadism, thyroid hypoplasia and growth hormone deficiency are frequent. To
date, seven genes have been positively implicated in HPE: Sonic hedgehog (SHH),
ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, PTCH, GLI2 and TDGF1. A molecular diagnosis can be performed by
gene sequencing and allele quantification for the four main genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3
and TGIF. Major rearrangements of the subtelomeres can also be identified by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Nevertheless, in about
70% of cases, the molecular basis of the disease remains unknown, suggesting the 
existence of several other candidate genes or environmental factors.
Consequently, a "multiple-hit hypothesis" of genetic and/or environmental factors
(like maternal diabetes) has been proposed to account for the extreme clinical
variability. In a practical approach, prenatal diagnosis is based on ultrasound
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) rather than on molecular diagnosis.
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive, and requires a multidisciplinary
management. Child outcome depends on the HPE severity and the medical and
neurological complications associated. Severely affected children have a very
poor prognosis. Mildly affected children may exhibit few symptoms and may live a 
normal life.

PMCID: PMC1802747
PMID: 17274816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Apr;18(4):1348-58. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Zic3 is required for maintenance of pluripotency in embryonic stem cells.

Lim LS(1), Loh YH, Zhang W, Li Y, Chen X, Wang Y, Bakre M, Ng HH, Stanton LW.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Group, Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome 
Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

Embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency is dependent upon sustained expression of
the key transcriptional regulators Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2. Dissection of the
regulatory networks downstream of these transcription factors has provided
critical insight into the molecular mechanisms that regulate ES cell pluripotency
and early differentiation. Here we describe a role for Zic3, a member of the Gli 
family of zinc finger transcription factors, in the maintenance of pluripotency
in ES cells. We show that Zic3 is expressed in ES cells and that this expression 
is repressed upon differentiation. The expression of Zic3 in pluripotent ES cells
is also directly regulated by Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog. Targeted repression of Zic3 
in human and mouse ES cells by RNA interference-induced expression of several
markers of the endodermal lineage. Notably, the expression of Nanog, a key
pluripotency regulator and repressor of extraembryonic endoderm specification in 
ES cells, was significantly reduced in Zic3 knockdown cells. This suggests that
Zic3 may prevent endodermal marker expression through Nanog-regulated pathways.
Thus our results extend the ES cell transcriptional network beyond Oct4, Nanog,
and Sox2, and further establish that Zic3 plays an important role in the
maintenance of pluripotency by preventing endodermal lineage specification in
embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC1838990
PMID: 17267691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9983-95. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

ZIC2-dependent transcriptional regulation is mediated by DNA-dependent protein
kinase, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, and RNA helicase A.

Ishiguro A(1), Ideta M, Mikoshiba K, Chen DJ, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. akiraishiguro@brain.riken.go.jp

The Zic family of zinc finger proteins is essential for animal development, as
demonstrated by the holoprosencephaly caused by mammalian Zic2 mutation. To
determine the molecular mechanism of Zic-mediated developmental control, we
characterized two types of high molecular weight complexes, including Zic2.
Complex I was composed of DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit
(DNA-PKcs), Ku70/80, and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; complex II contained
Ku70/80 and RNA helicase A; all the components interacted directly with Zic2
protein. Immunoprecipitation, subnuclear localization, and in vitro
phosphorylation analyses revealed that the DNA-PKcs in complex I played an
essential role in the assembly of complex II. Stepwise exchange from complex I to
complex II depended on phosphorylation of Zic2 by DNA-PK and poly-(ADP-ribose)
polymerase. Phosphorylated Zic2 protein made a stable complex with RNA helicase
A, and complex II could interact with RNA polymerase II.
Phosphorylation-dependent transformation of Zic2-containing molecular complexes
may occur in transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 17251188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Med Genet. 2007 Jan;44(1):e60.

13q Deletion and central nervous system anomalies: further insights from
karyotype-phenotype analyses of 14 patients.

Ballarati L, Rossi E, Bonati MT, Gimelli S, Maraschio P, Finelli P, Giglio S,
Lapi E, Bedeschi MF, Guerneri S, Arrigo G, Patricelli MG, Mattina T, Guzzardi O, 
Pecile V, Police A, Scarano G, Larizza L, Zuffardi O, Giardino D.

BACKGROUND: Chromosome 13q deletion is associated with varying phenotypes, which 
seem to depend on the location of the deleted segment. Although various attempts 
have been made to link the 13q deletion intervals to distinct phenotypes, there
is still no acknowledged consensus correlation between the monosomy of distinct
13q regions and specific clinical features.
METHODS: 14 Italian patients carrying partial de novo 13q deletions were studied.
Molecular-cytogenetic characterisation was carried out by means of
array-comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH) or fluorescent in situ
hybridisation (FISH).
RESULTS: Our 14 patients showed mental retardation ranging from profound-severe
to moderate-mild: eight had central nervous system (CNS) anomalies, including
neural tube defects (NTDs), six had eye abnormalities, nine had facial
dysmorphisms and 10 had hand or feet anomalies. The size of the deleted regions
varied from 4.2 to 75.7 Mb.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first systematic molecular characterisation of de
novo 13q deletions, and offers a karyotype-phenotype correlation based on
detailed clinical studies and molecular determinations of the deleted regions.
Analyses confirm that patients lacking the 13q32 band are the most seriously
affected, and critical intervals have been preliminarily assigned for CNS
malformations. Dose-sensitive genes proximal to q33.2 may be involved in NTDs.
The minimal deletion interval associated with the Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM)
was narrowed to the 13q32.2-33.2 region, in which the ZIC2 and ZIC5 genes
proposed as underlying various CNS malformations are mapped.

PMCID: PMC2597907
PMID: 17209130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Dec 15;140(24):2742-8.

A syndrome of holoprosencephaly, recurrent infections, and monocytosis.

Jubinsky PT(1), Shanske AL, Pixley FJ, Montagna C, Short MK.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and
Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, New York, USA. pjubinsk@aecom.yu.edu

We describe three siblings with holoprosencephaly, recurrent infections, and
increased peripheral blood monocytes. These children were born to apparently
healthy parents in a family with one unaffected child. Affected individuals had
microcephaly, severe developmental delay, failure to thrive, and brachydactyly.
The clinical courses were complicated by endocrine dysfunction, multiple
respiratory, and skin infections. Laboratory studies showed normal karyotypes,
normal lymphocyte function, and a peripheral blood monocytosis with markedly
abnormal morphology. Mutation analysis of the seven genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGI, 
FTDGF1, GLI2, and PTCH) known to be involved in holoprosencephaly was normal.
This is the first report demonstrating an association between abnormal
mononuclear phagocytes and holoprosencephaly.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17103456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2006 Sep;76(9):658-73.

Holoprosencephaly: clinical, anatomic, and molecular dimensions.

Cohen MM Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
michael.cohen@dal.ca

Holoprosencephaly is addressed under the following headings: alobar, semilobar,
and lobar holoprosencephaly; arrhinencephaly; agenesis of the corpus callosum;
pituitary abnormalities; hindbrain abnormalities; syntelencephaly;
aprosencephaly/atelencephaly; neural tube defects; facial anomalies; median cleft
lip; minor facial anomalies; single maxillary central incisor;
holoprosencephaly-like phenotype; epidemiology; genetic causes of
holoprosencephaly; teratogenic causes of holoprosencephaly; SHH mutations; ZIC2
mutations; SIX3 mutations; TGIF mutations; PTCH mutations; GLI2 mutations; FAST1 
mutations; TDGF1 mutations; and DHCR7 mutations.

PMID: 17001700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Dyn. 2006 Dec;235(12):3379-86.

Xenopus Zic4: conservation and diversification of expression profiles and protein
function among the Xenopus Zic family.

Fujimi TJ(1), Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

We compared the expression and function of Xenopus Zic4 with those of the other
four Xenopus laevis Zic family members (Zic1, Zic2, Zic3, and Zic5). Zic4
expression was detected mainly in the neural plate border, dorsal neural tube,
and somites, and was similar to that of Zic1, which is adjacent to Zic4 on the
same chromosome. Injection of wild-type or mutant Zic4 RNA caused the induction
of neural crest marker gene expression, hyperplastic neural tissue, and ectopic
pigment cell formation, indicating that Zic4 can induce neural and neural crest
tissue, as can other Xenopus Zic genes. Deletion analysis showed that the
zinc-finger domain is critical for many Zic4 functions, but the C-terminal region
is differently involved in induction of two neural crest markers, Slug and Sox10.
The protein function as determined by the animal cap explant assay was similar to
that of Zic5, but different from those of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3, suggesting that
Xenopus Zic genes can be divided into two groups based on function. These results
indicate that the five Xenopus Zic genes cooperatively regulate both neural and
neural crest development, despite significantly diverged expression profiles and 
functions.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16871625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Prenat Diagn. 2006 Mar;26(3):226-30.

A novel heterozygous missense mutation 377T > C (V126A) of TGIF gene in a family 
segregated with holoprosencephaly and moyamoya disease.

Chen M(1), Kuo SJ, Liu CS, Chen WL, Ko TM, Chen TH, Chang SP, Huang CH, Chang YY,
Wang BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Changhua Christian Hospital,
Changhua, Taiwan, Republic of China. mchen_cch@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVES: To identify whether any mutations of candidate genes including SHH,
ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF exist in a Taiwanese family segregated with
holoprosencephaly (HPE) and moyamoya disease.
METHODS: Genotypes of the candidate genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF were
determined in the family members who were available for analysis by sequencing.
In addition, genomic regions of another 50 unrelated Taiwanese (100 chromosomes) 
were studied to verify whether the nucleotide changes we found were mutations or 
polymorphisms.
RESULTS: A novel missense mutation 377T > C and two polymorphisms (420A > G and
487C > T) in the TGIF gene were identified. No mutations in SHH, ZIC2 and SIX3
were found. The mother of the three HPE fetuses was found to be afflicted with
moyamoya disease. A brief review of the mutations as well as polymorphisms
reported in the TGIF gene up to 2005 is given.
CONCLUSION: Molecular diagnosis can help genetic counseling in HPE, which is a
heterogeneous disorder with its phenotypic and genotypic spectrum highly widened 
and variable. The possible association between TGIF mutation and moyamoya disease
noted in our study also appeared to be novel.

2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 16475235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 1;12(1):83-8.

Prediction of lymph node metastasis in patients with endometrioid endometrial
cancer using expression microarray.

Bidus MA(1), Risinger JI, Chandramouli GV, Dainty LA, Litzi TJ, Berchuck A,
Barrett JC, Maxwell GL.

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed Army Medical Center and the United States Military Cancer
Institute, Washington, DC 20307, USA.

PURPOSE: To characterize the gene expression profiles of endometrioid endometrial
cancers associated with lymph node metastasis in an effort to identify genes
associated with metastatic spread.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tumors from 41 patients with endometrioid endometrial cancer
grossly confined to the uterine cavity were evaluated. Positive lymph nodes were 
noted in 12 of 41 patients. RNA was analyzed for gene expression using the
Affymetrix HG133A and HG133B GeneChip set, representing 45,000 array features
covering >28,000 UniGene clusters. Data analysis was done using multidimensional 
scaling, binary comparison, and hierarchical clustering. Gene expression for
several differentially expressed genes was examined using quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Gene expression data was obtained from 30,964 genes that were detected
in at least 5% of the cases. Supervised analysis of node-positive versus
node-negative cases indicated that 450 genes were significantly differentially
expressed between the two classes at P < 0.005, 81 of which were differentially
expressed by at least 2-fold at P < 0.005. Overexpressed genes included two cell 
cycle checkpoint genes, CDC2 and MAD2L1, which have previously been described in 
association with lymph node metastasis in other cancer types. The ZIC2 zinc
finger gene was overexpressed in endometrial cancers with positive nodes versus
those with negative nodes.
CONCLUSION: Gene expression profiling of the primary tumors in patients with
endometrioid endometrial cancers seems promising for identifying genes associated
with lymph node metastasis. Future studies should address whether the status of
nodal metastasis can be determined from the expression profiles of preoperative
tissue specimens.

PMID: 16397028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;119(1-2):1-8. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Molecular evaluation of foetuses with holoprosencephaly shows high incidence of
microdeletions in the HPE genes.

Bendavid C(1), Dubourg C, Gicquel I, Pasquier L, Saugier-Veber P, Durou MR,
Jaillard S, Frébourg T, Haddad BR, Henry C, Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe Génétique Humaine, IFR140 GFAS, CNRS UMR 6061, Université de Rennes1, 2
avenue du Pr Léon Bernard, CS 34317, 35043 Rennes Cedex, France.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common structural malformation of the forebrain
in humans, can be detected early during pregnancy using prenatal ultrasonography 
. Among foetuses with a normal karyotype, 14% have mutations in the four main HPE
genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF). Genomic rearrangements have now been implicated
in many genetic diseases, so we hypothesized that microdeletions in the major HPE
genes may also be common in HPE foetuses with severe phenotype or other
associated malformations. We screened the DNA obtained from 94 HPE foetuses with 
a normal karyotype for the presence of microdeletions involving the four major
HPE genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF). Thirteen of the foetuses had a point
mutation in one of the 4 genes and 81 had no known mutations. Quantitative
multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments (QMPSF) analysis was used for rapid 
determination of HPE genes copy numbers and the identified microdeletions were
confirmed by real time quantitative PCR, or fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) (if a cell line was available). Microdeletions were detected in 8 of 94
foetuses (8.5%) (2 in SHH, 2 in SIX3, 3 in ZIC2 and 1 in TGIF genes), and only
among the 81 foetuses with a normal karyotype and no point mutations. These data 
suggest that microdeletions in the four main HPE genes are a common cause of
prenatal HPE, as well as point mutations, and increase the total diagnosis rate
close to approximately 22.3% of foetuses with normal karyotype. Detection can be 
achieved by the QMPSF testing method that proved to be efficient for testing
several genes in a single assay.

PMID: 16323008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Child Neurol. 2005 Aug;20(8):637-43.

Embryology of the neural crest: its inductive role in the neurocutaneous
syndromes.

Sarnat HB(1), Flores-Sarnat L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Neurology), University of Calgary, Faculty of
Medicine, Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada.
harvey.sarnat@calgaryhealthregion.ca

Neural crest cells are first recognized at the lateral margin of the neural
placode shortly after gastrulation, although they are not committed to their
diverse fates until later. After dorsal closure of the neural tube, neural crest 
cells separate and migrate throughout the embryo to form many structures of
ectodermal origin (eg, dorsal root and autonomic ganglia, peripheral nerve
sheaths) and mesodermal origin (eg, blood vessels, melanocytes, adipose tissue,
membranous bone, connective tissue, most of the ocular globe). Terminal
differentiation occurs after migration is complete. Three regions of the neural
tube generate neural crest: rhombencephalon, mesencephalon, and prosencephalon,
each with a different migratory pattern. The most important genes promoting
neural crest differentiation and migration are those with a dorsalizing influence
in the vertical axis of the neural tube (eg, PAX3, BMP4, ZIC2), some segmentation
genes (eg, WNT1), genes that inhibit neural crest (eg, EGR2), and neural
crest-specific differentiating genes (eg, SLUG, SOX10). In the neurocutaneous
syndromes, diverse features result from abnormal neural crest differentiation,
providing a more encompassing embryologic basis for these disorders than the
traditional view that these syndromes are somehow related to skin and brain
because both are ectodermal derivatives. Abnormal angiogenesis, areas of abnormal
pigmentation that sometimes follow the lines of Blashko, nerve sheath
proliferations, disorders of chromaffin tissue, lipomes and benign and malignant 
tumors are frequent features. Many defective genes in neurocutaneous syndromes
have an additional function as tumor suppressors. Interactions between genes
associated with these disorders and others essential to neural crest formation,
migration, and differentiation, are a likely molecular genetic basis for these
diseases. The craniofacial abnormalities associated with many cerebral
malformations and cutaneous lesions in some neurocutaneous syndromes emphasize an
important inductive role of the neural tube in the development of non-neural
tissues, mediated through neural crest.

PMID: 16225807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Development. 2005 Nov;132(21):4845-55. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Maternal Xenopus Zic2 negatively regulates Nodal-related gene expression during
anteroposterior patterning.

Houston DW(1), Wylie C.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Iowa, Department of Biological Sciences, 257 BB, Iowa City, 
IA 52246-1324, USA. douglas-houston@uiowa.edu

During the development of Xenopus laevis, maternal mRNAs and proteins stored in
the egg direct early patterning events such as the specification of the
dorsoventral axis and primary germ layers. In an expression screen to identify
maternal factors important for early development, we isolated a truncated cDNA
for maternal Zic2 (tZic2), encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor. The
predicted tZic2 protein lacked the N-terminal region, but retained the
zinc-finger domain. When expressed in embryos, tZic2 inhibited head and axial
development, and blocked the ability of full-length Zic2 to induce neural crest
genes. Depletion of maternal Zic2 from oocytes, using antisense oligonucleotides,
caused exogastrulation, anterior truncations and axial defects. We show that loss
of maternal Zic2 results in persistent and increased expression of Xenopus
nodal-related (Xnr) genes, except for Xnr4, and overall increased Nodal
signaling. Injection of a Nodal antagonist, Cerberus-short, reduced the severity 
of head and axial defects in Zic2-depleted embryos. Depletion of Zic2 could not
restore Xnr expression to embryos additionally depleted of VegT, a T-domain
transcription factor and an activator of Xnr gene transcription. Taken together, 
our results suggest a role for maternal Zic2 in the suppression of Xnr genes in
early development. ZIC2 is mutated in human holoprosencephaly (HPE), a severe
defect in brain hemisphere separation, and these results strengthen the
suggestion that increased Nodal-related activity is a cause of HPE.

PMID: 16207750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Med Genet. 2006 Jun;43(6):496-500. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

Multicolour FISH and quantitative PCR can detect submicroscopic deletions in
holoprosencephaly patients with a normal karyotype.

Bendavid C(1), Haddad BR, Griffin A, Huizing M, Dubourg C, Gicquel I, Cavalli LR,
Pasquier L, Shanske AL, Long R, Ouspenskaia M, Odent S, Lacbawan F, David V,
Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 35 Convent Drive, MSC 3717, Building 35, Room 1B-203,
Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural malformation of the
developing forebrain. At birth, nearly 50% of children with HPE have cytogenetic 
anomalies. Approximately 20% of infants with normal chromosomes have sequence
mutations in one of the four main HPE genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF). The
other non-syndromic forms of HPE may be due to environmental factors or mutations
in other genes, or potentially due to submicroscopic deletions of HPE genes. We
used two complementary assays to test for HPE associated submicroscopic
deletions. Firstly, we developed a multicolour fluorescent in situ hybridisation 
(FISH) assay using probes for the four major HPE genes and for two candidate
genes (DISP1 and FOXA2). We analysed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) from 103
patients who had CNS findings of HPE, normal karyotypes, and no point mutations, 
and found seven microdeletions. We subsequently applied quantitative PCR to 424
HPE DNA samples, including the 103 samples studied by FISH: 339 with CNS findings
of HPE, and 85 with normal CNS and characteristic HPE facial findings.
Microdeletions for either SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, or TGIF were found in 16 of the 339
severe HPE cases (that is, with CNS findings; 4.7%). In contrast, no
microdeletion was found in the 85 patients at the mildest end of the HPE
spectrum. Based on our data, microdeletion testing should be considered as part
of an evaluation of holoprosencephaly, especially in severe HPE cases.

PMCID: PMC2564532
PMID: 16199538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Neurosci Res. 2005 Nov;53(3):323-30. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Neuronal cell type-specific promoter of the alpha CaM kinase II gene is activated
by Zic2, a Zic family zinc finger protein.

Sakurada T(1), Mima K, Kurisaki A, Sugino H, Yamauchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The
University of Tokushima, Shomachi 1, Tokushima 770-8505, Japan.

To understand the neuronal cell type-specific expression of
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaM kinase II), we investigated
binding proteins that specifically activated the promoter of the alpha isoform of
CaM kinase II (alpha CaM kinase II). Proteins that bind the promoter sequence
were found in rat brain nuclear extract by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. 
Then, we screened for binding proteins in a mouse brain cDNA library using the
yeast one-hybrid system. Zic2, a Zic family zinc finger transcription factor, was
identified as one of the binding proteins. To investigate the effect of Zic2 on
the promoter activity, Zic2 cDNA was expressed with a luciferase reporter gene
containing a neuronal cell type-specific promoter of alpha CaM kinase II in
neuronal and non-neuronal cells. The promoter activity of alpha CaM kinase II was
enhanced 1.3-5-fold in cultured neuronal cells by Zic2. The activation was varied
among neuronal cell types. Zic2 also increased the promoter activity in
non-neuronal cells, although the relative luciferase activites in non-neuronal
cells were lower than those in neuronal cell lines. These results indicated that 
Zic2 was one of the proteins binding to, and regulating the activity of, the
promoter of alpha CaM kinase II.

PMID: 16157407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int J Cancer. 2006 Mar 1;118(5):1165-72.

Gene expression profiles relate to SS18/SSX fusion type in synovial sarcoma.

Fernebro J(1), Francis P, Edén P, Borg A, Panagopoulos I, Mertens F,
Vallon-Christersson J, Akerman M, Rydholm A, Bauer HC, Mandahl N, Nilbert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lund University, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden.
Josefin.Fernebro@med.lu.se

We applied 27k spotted cDNA microarray slides to assess gene expression profiles 
in 26 samples from 24 patients with synovial sarcomas (SS). The data were
analyzed in relation to histopathologic type, cytogenetic aberrations, gene
fusion type and development of distant metastases. Supervised analysis based on
gene fusion type in 12 SS with SS18/SSX1 and 9 with SS18/SSX2 revealed
significant differences in gene expression profiles. Among the discriminators
were several genes that have previously been found to be upregulated in SS,
including AXL, ZIC2, SPAG7, AGRN, FOXC1, NCAM1 and multiple metallothioneins.
Histopathology and degree of cytogenetic complexity did not significantly
influence expression, whereas a genetic signature that related to development of 
metastases could be discerned, albeit with a high false-positive rate. In
conclusion, our findings demonstrate differentially expressed genes for the 2
major gene fusion variants in SS, SS18/SSX1 and SS18/SSX2, and thereby suggest
that these result in different downstream effects.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16152617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer. 2005 Jun 15;103(12):2575-83.

Frequency of SOX Group B (SOX1, 2, 3) and ZIC2 antibodies in Turkish patients
with small cell lung carcinoma and their correlation with clinical parameters.

Vural B(1), Chen LC, Saip P, Chen YT, Ustuner Z, Gonen M, Simpson AJ, Old LJ,
Ozbek U, Gure AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Research, Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Expression of neuroectodermal markers is a key feature of small cell 
lung carcinoma (SCLC). Although immune responses against a number of these
proteins have been associated with paraneoplastic neuronal disease (PND), most
patients with SCLC have anti-neuroectodermal antibodies in the absence of PND.
Whether these immune responses affect the clinical outcome in SCLC is critical in
understanding the potential value of these proteins as cancer vaccine targets as 
well as in the pathogenesis of PND.
METHODS: The authors investigated the frequency of immunoglobulin G
autoantibodies against Sry-like high-mobility group box (SOX)1, 2, 3 and
Zinc-finger gene of the cerebellum (ZIC)2 proteins in stored serum samples from
90 patients utilizing the lambda-phage plaque assay. Data obtained from patient
records were utilized to measure clinical correlates of seroreactivity.
RESULTS: Antibodies to SOX1 were present in 28% of patients and another 28% had
anti-ZIC2 antibodies, classifying these as some of the most frequent antibody
responses observed in SCLC. None had autoimmune paraneoplastic disease. Antibody 
titers were frequently as high as > or = 1:10(6) and were stable for < or = 6
months after diagnosis. Seroreactivity against either SOX1 or ZIC2 correlated
with younger age, lower lactate dehydrogenase levels, and better response to
initial therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The frequent and stable presence of SOX Group B and/or ZIC2
antibodies in SCLC, but not in healthy individuals examined, indicates they are
serological markers of SCLC. However, the correlation between known clinical
parameters of less aggressive disease and seroreactivity suggests that these
antibodies are indicators of better prognosis in SCLC and warrants further
studies to clarify the nature of the underlying immune responses.

Copyright 2005 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 15880380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2401-13. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Six3 functions in anterior neural plate specification by promoting cell
proliferation and inhibiting Bmp4 expression.

Gestri G(1), Carl M, Appolloni I, Wilson SW, Barsacchi G, Andreazzoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo, Dipartimento di Fisiologia, e 
Biochimica, Universita' degli Studi di Pisa, Via Carducci 13, 56010 Ghezzano
(Pisa), Italy.

Although it is well established that Six3 is a crucial regulator of vertebrate
eye and forebrain development, it is unknown whether this homeodomain protein has
a role in the initial specification of the anterior neural plate. In this study, 
we show that exogenous Six3 can expand the anterior neural plate in both Xenopus 
and zebrafish, and that this occurs in part through Six3-dependent
transcriptional regulation of the cell cycle regulators cyclinD1 and p27Xic1, as 
well as the anti-neurogenic genes Zic2 and Xhairy2. However, Six3 can still
expand the neural plate in the presence of cell cycle inhibitors and we show that
this is likely to be due to its ability to repress the expression of Bmp4 in
ectoderm adjacent to the anterior neural plate. Furthermore, exogenous Six3 is
able to restore the size of the anterior neural plate in chordino mutant
zebrafish, indicating that it has the ability to promote anterior neural
development by antagonising the activity of the BMP pathway. On its own, Six3 is 
unable to induce neural tissue in animal caps, but it can do so in combination
with Otx2. These results suggest a very early role for Six3 in specification of
the anterior neural plate, through the regulation of cell proliferation and the
inhibition of BMP signalling.

PMCID: PMC2789257
PMID: 15843413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Clin Genet. 2005 Apr;67(4):290-6.

The ZIC gene family in development and disease.

Grinberg I(1), Millen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The human ZIC gene family is comprised of five members encoding zinc-finger
transcription factors, which are the vertebrate homologs of the Drosophila
odd-paired gene. Mutations in ZIC genes in humans have recently been implicated
in a wide variety of congenital malformations, including Dandy-Walker
malformation, holoprosencephaly, neural tube defects, and heterotaxy. Mutant
analysis of these genes in mice has underscored the conserved developmental roles
of these genes. Further, this analysis has begun to elucidate the molecular and
developmental mechanisms underlying these important birth defects.

PMID: 15733262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Feb 1;14(3):411-20. Epub 2004 Dec 8.

In vitro analysis of partial loss-of-function ZIC2 mutations in
holoprosencephaly: alanine tract expansion modulates DNA binding and
transactivation.

Brown L(1), Paraso M, Arkell R, Brown S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, NY, USA.

Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in ZIC2 result in the severe brain
malformation known as holoprosencephaly (HPE), indicating that forebrain
development is exquisitely sensitive to the activity of this poorly understood
transcription factor. To identify the regions of ZIC2 that are essential for
activity, we have assessed the ability of a variety of ZIC2 mutant proteins to
function in in vitro assays. Two sources of information were used to design
relevant mutations. First, phenotype producing mutations in human and in mouse
ZIC2 were mimicked and secondly, a comparative sequence analysis of the
C-terminal was carried out. Analysis of these mutations suggests that either a
decrease or an increase in ZIC2 mediated transcriptional activity can produce a
forebrain phenotype. In addition, the analysis reveals that the C-terminal of
ZIC2 contains both activation and repression domains. This region of ZIC2
contains an alanine-tract, and expansion of this domain is associated with HPE.
In vitro analysis of proteins with alterations in alanine-tract length
illustrates that the C-terminal alanine-tract of ZIC2 influences the strength of 
DNA binding and alters transcriptional activity in a promoter-specific manner.
This finding provides a possible mechanism by which alanine-tract expansion
mutations could alter the function of other transcription factors.

PMID: 15590697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Int J Oncol. 2005 Jan;26(1):77-86.

Serological identification of tumor antigens of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Shimada H(1), Nakashima K, Ochiai T, Nabeya Y, Takiguchi M, Nomura F, Hiwasa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Academic Surgery, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine, 
1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. hshimada@faculty.chiba-u.jp

Autoantibodies are often detected in the patients with esophageal cancer. We
applied serological analysis of recombinant cDNA expression libraries (SEREX) to 
a case of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in order to identify tumor antigens.
A cDNA library derived from an esophageal cancer cell line was bacterially
expressed and screened for interaction with antibodies in five allogeneic sera of
patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. To examine the specific
immunoreactivity of the antigens, sera from 16 more patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma, 16 patients with gastric cancer, 16 patients with colon 
cancer, 16 patients with breast cancer and 37 healthy volunteers were screened.
We identified 11 independent cDNA clones that potentially encoded esophageal
cancer tumor antigens. The identified cDNA clones were SURF1, HOOK2, CENP-F,
ZIC2, hCLA-iso, Ki-1/57, enigma, HCA25a, SPK and two EST clones named LOC146223
and AGENCOURT_7565913. The sero-positive rates of antibodies against SURF1 (48%),
LOC146223 (38%), HOOK2 (14%) and AGENCOURT_7565913 (14%) were significantly
higher in esophageal cancer patients than in healthy controls. At least one of
these antibodies was detected in 18 (86%) of 21 sera from esophageal cancer
patients. A disease-specific humoral immune response against SURF1, LOC146223,
HOOK2 or AGENCOURT_7565913 was observed in most patients with esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma. Antibodies against these SEREX antigens may represent a pool of
candidates for serum tumor markers of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

PMID: 15586227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):85-97.

Specification of the enveloping layer and lack of autoneuralization in zebrafish 
embryonic explants.

Sagerström CG(1), Gammill LS, Veale R, Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

We have analyzed the roles of cell contact during determination of the outermost 
enveloping layer (EVL) and deeper neurectoderm in zebrafish embryos. Outer cells,
but not deeper cells, are specified to express the EVL-specific marker, cyt1 by
late blastula. EVL specification requires cell contact or close cell proximity,
because cyt1 is not expressed after explant dissociation. The EVL may be
homologous to the Xenopus epithelial layer, including the ventral larval
epidermis. While Xenopus epidermal cytokeratin gene expression is activated by
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling, zebrafish cyt1 is not responsive to
BMPs. Zebrafish early gastrula ectodermal explants are specified to express the
neural markers opl (zic1) and otx2, and this expression is prevented by BMP4.
Dissociation of zebrafish explants prevents otx2 and opl expression, suggesting
that neural specification in zebrafish requires cell contact or close cell
proximity. This finding is in contrast to the case in Xenopus, where ectodermal
dissociation leads to activation of neural gene expression, or autoneuralization.
Our data suggest that distinct mechanisms direct development of homologous
lineages in different vertebrates.

PMID: 15543604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell. 2004 Nov 12;119(4):567-78.

Magnitude of binocular vision controlled by islet-2 repression of a genetic
program that specifies laterality of retinal axon pathfinding.

Pak W(1), Hindges R, Lim YS, Pfaff SL, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Lab, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Pathfinding of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons at the midline optic chiasm
determines whether RGCs project to ipsilateral or contralateral brain visual
centers, critical for binocular vision. Using Isl2tau-lacZ knockin mice, we show 
that the LIM-homeodomain transcription factor Isl2 marks only contralaterally
projecting RGCs. The transcription factor Zic2 and guidance receptor EphB1,
required by RGCs to project ipsilaterally, colocalize in RGCs distinct from Isl2 
RGCs in the ventral-temporal crescent (VTC), the source of ipsilateral
projections. Isl2 knockout mice have an increased ipsilateral projection
originating from significantly more RGCs limited to the VTC. Isl2 knockouts also 
have increased Zic2 and EphB1 expression and significantly more Zic2 RGCs in the 
VTC. We conclude that Isl2 specifies RGC laterality by repressing an ipsilateral 
pathfinding program unique to VTC RGCs and involving Zic2 and EphB1. This genetic
hierarchy controls binocular vision by regulating the magnitude and source of
ipsilateral projections and reveals unique retinal domains.

PMID: 15537545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Neurosci. 2004 Nov 3;24(44):9962-70.

Molecular organization of the ferret visual thalamus.

Kawasaki H(1), Crowley JC, Livesey FJ, Katz LC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Neurobiology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.
kawasaki@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The visual system encodes and deciphers information using parallel, anatomically 
segregated, processing streams. To reveal patterns of gene expression in the
visual thalamus correlated with physiological processing streams, we designed a
custom ferret cDNA microarray. By isolating specific subregions and layers of the
thalamus, we identified a set of transcription factors, including Zic2, Islet1,
and Six3, the unique distribution profiles of which differentiated the lateral
geniculate nucleus (LGN) from the associated perigeniculate nucleus. Within the
LGN, odd homeobox1 differentiated the A layers, which contain X cells and Y
cells, from the C layers. One neuron-specific protein, Purkinje cell protein 4
(PCP4), was strongly expressed in Y cells in the ferret LGN and in the
magnocellular layers of the primate LGN. In the ferret LGN, PCP4 expression began
as early as postnatal day 7 (P7), suggesting that Y cells are already specified
by P7. These results reveal a rich molecular repertoire that correlates with
functional divisions of the LGN.

PMID: 15525781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Development. 2004 Dec;131(23):5871-81. Epub 2004 Nov 3.

Six1 promotes a placodal fate within the lateral neurogenic ectoderm by
functioning as both a transcriptional activator and repressor.

Brugmann SA(1), Pandur PD, Kenyon KL, Pignoni F, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The
George Washington University, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Cranial placodes, which give rise to sensory organs in the vertebrate head, are
important embryonic structures whose development has not been well studied
because of their transient nature and paucity of molecular markers. We have used 
markers of pre-placodal ectoderm (PPE) (six1, eya1) to determine that gradients
of both neural inducers and anteroposterior signals are necessary to induce and
appropriately position the PPE. Overexpression of six1 expands the PPE at the
expense of neural crest and epidermis, whereas knock-down of Six1 results in
reduction of the PPE domain and expansion of the neural plate, neural crest and
epidermis. Using expression of activator and repressor constructs of six1 or
co-expression of wild-type six1 with activating or repressing co-factors (eya1
and groucho, respectively), we demonstrate that Six1 inhibits neural crest and
epidermal genes via transcriptional repression and enhances PPE genes via
transcriptional activation. Ectopic expression of neural plate, neural crest and 
epidermal genes in the PPE demonstrates that these factors mutually influence
each other to establish the appropriate boundaries between these ectodermal
domains.

PMID: 15525662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Dyn. 2004 Dec;231(4):815-27.

Molecular characterization of conditionally immortalized cell lines derived from 
mouse early embryonic inner ear.

Germiller JA(1), Smiley EC, Ellis AD, Hoff JS, Deshmukh I, Allen SJ, Barald KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Program in Cell and Molecular
Biology, Program in Neuroscience, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-0616, USA.

Inner ear sensory hair cells (HCs), supporting cells (SCs), and sensory neurons
(SNs) are hypothesized to develop from common progenitors in the early embryonic 
otocyst. Because little is known about the molecular signals that control this
lineage specification, we derived a model system of early otic development:
conditionally immortalized otocyst (IMO) cell lines from the embryonic day 9.5
Immortomouse. This age is the earliest stage at which the otocyst can easily be
separated from surrounding mesenchymal, nervous system, and epithelial cells. At 
9.5 days post coitum, there are still pluripotent cells in the otocyst, allowing 
for the eventual identification of both SN and HC precursors--and possibly an
elusive inner ear stem cell. Cell lines derived from primitive precursor cells
can also be used as blank canvases for transfections of genes that can affect
lineage decisions as the cells differentiate. It is important, therefore, to
characterize the "baseline state" of these cell lines in as much detail as
possible. We characterized seven representative "precursor-like" IMO cell
populations and the uncloned IMO cells, before cell sorting, at the molecular
level by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and immunocytochemistry (IHC), and one
line (IMO-2B1) in detail by real-time quantitative PCR and IHC. Many of the
phenotypic markers characteristic of differentiated HCs or SCs were detected in
IMO-2B1 proliferating cells, as well as during differentiation for up to 30 days 
in culture. These IMO cell lines represent a unique model system for studying
early stages of inner ear development and determining the consequences of
affecting key molecular events in their differentiation.

Copyright (c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15517566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5727-39.

Foxd1 is required for proper formation of the optic chiasm.

Herrera E(1), Marcus R, Li S, Williams SE, Erskine L, Lai E, Mason C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology and Center for Neurobiology
and Behavior, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 West
168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

In animals with binocular vision, retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons from each eye
sort in the developing ventral diencephalon to project to ipsi- or contralateral 
targets, thereby forming the optic chiasm. Ipsilaterally projecting axons arise
from the ventrotemporal (VT) retina and contralaterally projecting axons
primarily from the other retinal quadrants. The winged helix transcription factor
Foxd1 (previously known as BF-2, Brain Factor 2) is expressed in VT retina, as
well as in the ventral diencephalon during the formation of the optic chiasm. We 
report here that in embryos lacking Foxd1, both retinal development and chiasm
morphogenesis are disrupted. In the Foxd1 deficient retina, proteins designating 
the ipsilateral projection, such as Zic2 and EphB1, are missing, and the domain
of Foxg1 (BF-1) expands from nasal retina into the VT crescent. In retina-chiasm 
co-cultures, VT RGCs from Foxd1 deficient retina are not repulsed by chiasm
cells, and in vivo many VT RGCs aberrantly project contralaterally. However, even
though the ipsilateral program is lost in the retina, a larger than normal
uncrossed component develops in Foxd1 deficient embryos. Chiasm defects include
axon stalling in the chiasm and a reduction in the total number of RGCs
projecting to the optic tract. In addition, in the Foxd1 deficient ventral
diencephalon, Foxg1 invades the Foxd1 domain, Zic2 and Islet1 expression are
minimized, and Slit2 prematurely expands, changes that could contribute to axon
projection errors. Thus, Foxd1 plays a dual role in the establishment of the
binocular visual pathways: first, in specification of the VT retina, acting
upstream of proteins directing the ipsilateral pathway; and second, in the
patterning of the developing ventral diencephalon where the optic chiasm forms.

PMID: 15509772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Nov 5;324(1):302-7.

Molecular properties of Zic4 and Zic5 proteins: functional diversity within Zic
family.

Ishiguro A(1), Inoue T, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The Zic-family proteins control various developmental processes. Previous studies
have shown that Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 can act as transcriptional regulators, and
that their functions are repressed by I-mfa, which has been identified as a
repressor for basic helix-loop-helix-type transcriptional factors. Here, we
investigated the molecular properties of the Zic4 and Zic5 proteins. Zic4/Zic5
showed DNA-binding activity to the Gli-binding sequence, similar to
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins. However, Zic4/Zic5 did not exhibit any significant
transcriptional activation ability nor they bind to I-mfa differently from
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3. The nuclear localization of Zic4/Zic5 was not affected by the
presence of the I-mfa protein, whereas the Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins were
translocated to the cytoplasmic compartment in the presence of I-mfa. The
difference may be attributable to the dissimilarity of the N-terminal region
between the Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 and Zic4/Zic5 proteins, since the binding of the
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins to I-mfa occurs through their N-terminal regions.

PMID: 15465018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2004 Aug;70(8):537-44.

Anomalies of the forebrain with radial limb defects: Garcia-Lurie-Steinfeld
syndrome?

McPherson E(1), Huff D, Dunn J, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics Services, Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield,
Wisconsin 54449, USA. mcpherson.elizabeth@marshfieldclinic.org

BACKGROUND: Severe anomalies of the forebrain together with radial limb anomalies
have been reported in Steinfeld syndrome, XK aprosencephaly, and partial monosomy
13q. Steinfeld syndrome is an extremely variable autosomal dominant condition
that, in severe cases, is characterized by holoprosencephaly, radial limb
defects, and renal and/or cardiac defects. In mild cases there may be only thumb 
hypoplasia, ocular coloboma, or oral clefts. XK aprosencephaly, also called
Garcia-Lurie syndrome (GLS), is a usually sporadic disorder with radial limb
defects and aprosencephaly/atelencephaly. Based on two atypical sibships,
autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested. Two patients with variations 
of monosomy 13q have been described with atelencephaly but, generally, Steinfeld 
and XK aprosencephaly patients are chromosomally normal. Holoprosencephaly in 13q
deletion patients appears to be due to ZIC2 mutations, but ZIC2 has not been
previously tested in Steinfeld syndrome or GLS patients.
CASES: We report three sporadic cases with clinical features intermediate between
Steinfeld and GLS, including severe forebrain malformations and radial limb
defects. All had normal karyotypes, and mutations in ZIC2 were absent in the two 
cases tested.
CONCLUSIONS: In our cases and in the literature there is significant clinical
overlap between Steinfeld syndrome and GLS. We propose these conditions may not
be nosologically or etiologically distinct. The spectrum of severe forebrain
anomalies in these conditions is broader than previously thought and may include 
some neural tube defects. Mild cases are difficult to identify and the full range
of expression remains unknown. Autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete
penetrance and frequent new mutations is postulated. Thorough clinical evaluation
is recommended for children with severe forebrain and radial limb defects.

PMID: 15329833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Aug 15;129A(1):21-4.

Phenotypic and molecular variability of the holoprosencephalic spectrum.

Lazaro L(1), Dubourg C, Pasquier L, Le Duff F, Blayau M, Durou MR, de la Pintière
AT, Aguilella C, David V, Odent S.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, France.

Since 1996, a European network has been organized from Rennes, France and
holoprosencephalic files were collected for clinical and molecular study.
Familial instances of typical and atypical holoprosencephaly (HPE) were found in 
30% of cases. All affected children had psychomotor delay with microcephaly,
often associated with endocrine, digestive, and respiratory abnormalities, and
thermal dysregulation. Among 173 subjects in the molecular study, 28 heterozygous
mutations were identified (16%): 15 SHH mutations, 6 ZIC2 mutations, 5 SIX3
mutations, and 2 TGIF mutations.

PMID: 15266610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Sep;4(5):505-11.

Overlapping and distinct expression domains of Zic2 and Zic3 during mouse
gastrulation.

Elms P(1), Scurry A, Davies J, Willoughby C, Hacker T, Bogani D, Arkell R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Early Development, Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell,
Oxfordshire OX11 0RD, UK.

The Zic genes are the vertebrate homologues of the Drosophila Odd-paired gene.
Mutations in two of these genes are associated with human congenital genetic
disorders. Mutation of human and mouse Zic2 is associated with holoprosencephaly 
which is caused by a defect of ventral forebrain development and mutation of
human and mouse Zic3 is associated with a X-linked heterotaxy syndrome that
results from a failure of left-right axis formation. The embryological role of
the Zic genes in these disorders is not well understood. Here we show that both
of these genes are expressed prior to and throughout gastrulation. The genes show
some broad similarities in their expression domains. Both genes however are also 
uniquely expressed in some tissues and these unique domains correlate with
regions that potentially play a role in the aetiology of the respective genetic
disorders. During primitive streak stages Zic2 is expressed transiently and
uniquely in the node and the head process mesendoderm. The head process is known 
to be required for the establishment or maintenance of the ventral forebrain,
which is the region disrupted in holoprosencephaly. Zic3 is not expressed in the 
node during primitive streak stages but is expressed in and around the node
beginning from the head fold stages of development. This expression of Zic3
correlates well with the first steps in the establishment of the left-right axis.
We also examined the expression of the closely related gene, Zic1, and did not
detect any transcripts in gastrulation stage embryos.

PMID: 15261827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Hum Mutat. 2004 Jul;24(1):43-51.

Molecular screening of SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF genes in patients with features 
of holoprosencephaly spectrum: Mutation review and genotype-phenotype
correlations.

Dubourg C(1), Lazaro L, Pasquier L, Bendavid C, Blayau M, Le Duff F, Durou MR,
Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.
christele.dubourg@chu-rennes.fr

Holoprosencephaly (HPE; 1 out of 16,000 live births; 1 out of 250 conceptuses) is
a complex brain malformation resulting from incomplete cleavage of the
prosencephalon, affecting both the forebrain and the face. Clinical expressivity 
is variable, ranging from a single cerebral ventricle and cyclopia to clinically 
unaffected carriers in familial dominant autosomic HPE. The disease is
genetically heterogeneous, but additional environmental agents also contribute to
the etiology of HPE. In our cohort of 200 patients, 34 heterozygous mutations
were identified, 24 of them being novel ones: 13 out of 17 in the Sonic hedgehog 
gene (SHH); 4 out of 7 in ZIC2; and 7 out of 8 in SIX3. The two mutations
identified in TGIF have already been reported. Novel phenotypes associated with a
mutation have been described, such as abnormalities of the pituitary gland and
corpus callosum, colobomatous microphthalmia, choanal aperture stenosis, and
isolated cleft lip. This study confirms the great genetic heterogeneity of the
disease, the important phenotypic variability in HPE families, and the difficulty
to establish genotype-phenotype correlations.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15221788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jul 16;320(1):233-40.

Myogenic repressor I-mfa interferes with the function of Zic family proteins.

Mizugishi K(1), Hatayama M, Tohmonda T, Ogawa M, Inoue T, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute
(BSI), Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zinc finger proteins belonging to the Zic family control several developmental
processes such as patterning of the axial skeleton. Here we mapped the
transcriptional regulatory domains in Zic2 protein and identified a protein which
specifically binds to one of them. In the mapping experiments, an amino-terminal 
region was identified as transcriptional regulatory domains. A search for
proteins binding to the amino terminal domain of Zic2 revealed that inhibitor of 
MyoD family (I-mfa) protein, which has been identified as a repressor of myogenic
helix-loop-helix class transcription factors, can physically interact with the
amino terminal domain. When Zic1-3 and I-mfa proteins were co-expressed in
cultured cells, nuclear import of the Zic proteins was inhibited. Consequently,
I-mfa inhibited transcriptional activation by the Zic proteins in cultured cells.
These results suggest that the physical and functional interaction between Zic
and I-mfa proteins can play a role in the vertebrate development.

PMID: 15207726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Neurocytol. 2004 Jan;33(1):23-35.

Holoprosencephaly--topologic variations in a liveborn series: a general model
based upon MRI analysis.

Takahashi TS(1), Kinsman S, Makris N, Grant E, Haselgrove C, McInerney S, Kennedy
DN, Takahashi TA, Fredrickson K, Mori S, Caviness VS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

We present an MRI-based anatomic analysis of a series of 9 human brains,
representing lobar, semilobar and alobar forms of holoprosencephaly. The analysis
of these variable forms of the malformation is based upon a topologic systematics
established in a prior analysis of a homogeneous set of semilobar malformations. 
This systematics has the dual advantage that it serves both as a uniform
reference for qualitative description and as a quantitative descriptive base for 
mathematical correlations between parameters of topology and of growth and
development. Within this systematics, the prosencephalic midline is divided from 
caudal to rostral into diencephalic (DD-right and left, subthalamus through
suprachiasmatic junction with telencephalon), telencephalic (TT-right and left,
suprachiasmatic border of telencephalon midline to hippocampal commissure) and
diencephalic-telencephalic (DT-right and left-hippocampal commissure through
temporal limb of choroid fissure) segments. The topologic abnormality of the
initial semilobar series was expressed in an orderly rostral to caudal gradient
along the TT segment. In each malformation, normal midline topology began with a 
small posterior corpus callosum. Although the topologic anomaly in the present
series invariably also involved the TT segment, this involvement was not
continuous and was variably associated with anomalies of the DD in 6 and
unilaterally of the DT in 1 brain. In the present as well as with the earlier
series of HPE malformations but not in "normative brains," total telencephalic
growth is strongly correlated with the length of the midline telencephalic
segment. We propose that this system of analysis will be sensitive to the
developmental stage and locus of expression of genetic and non-genetic
determinants of the formal origin of HPE. For all of the present series,
karyotype anlyses were normal. Mutations in the Shh and Zic2 genes were excluded 
in 2 cases.

PMID: 15173630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 1;270(1):146-62.

Mouse Zic5 deficiency results in neural tube defects and hypoplasia of cephalic
neural crest derivatives.

Inoue T(1), Hatayama M, Tohmonda T, Itohara S, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology and Laboratory for Comparative
Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198,
Japan.

Zic family genes encode zinc finger proteins, which are homologues of the
Drosophila pair-rule gene odd-paired. In the present study, we characterized the 
fifth member of the mouse Zic family gene, mouse Zic5. Zic5 is located near Zic2,
which is responsible for human brain malformation syndrome (holoprosencephaly, or
HPE). In embryonic stages, Zic5 was expressed in dorsal part of neural tissues
and limbs. Expression of Zic5 overlapped with those of other Zic genes, most
closely with Zic2, but was not identical. Targeted disruption of Zic5 resulted in
insufficient neural tube closure at the rostral end, similar to that seen in Zic2
mutant mice. In addition, the Zic5-deficient mice exhibited malformation of
neural-crest-derived facial bones, especially the mandible, which had not been
observed in other Zic family mutants. During the embryonic stages, there were
delays in the development of the first branchial arch and extension of the
trigeminal and facial nerves. Neural crest marker staining revealed fewer neural 
crest cells in the dorsal cephalic region of the mutant embryos without
significant changes in their migration. When mouse Zic5 was overexpressed in
Xenopus embryos, expression of a neural crest marker was enhanced. These findings
suggested that Zic5 is involved in the generation of neural crest tissue in mouse
development. ZIC5 is also located close to ZIC2 in humans, and deletions of
13q32, where ZIC2 is located, lead to congenital brain and digit malformations
known as the "13q32 deletion syndrome". Based on both their similar expression
pattern in mouse embryos and the malformations observed in Zic5-deficient mutant 
mice, human ZIC5 might be involved in the deletion syndrome.

PMID: 15136147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 May;4(3):345-50.

Sequence relationships and expression patterns of zebrafish zic2 and zic5 genes.

Toyama R(1), Gomez DM, Mana MD, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 6B, Room 413, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The zinc finger motif forms a DNA binding domain that is found in a wide variety 
of proteins. Among them, the members of the zic gene family are highly conserved 
throughout metazoans. We report here the isolation of two new members of this
gene family in zebrafish, zic2.2 and zic5, isolated during random screening for
tissue-specific genes. Zic2.2 is closely related to the previously reported zic2 
gene, which we propose to rename zic2.1; these two genes form a subfamily with
other vertebrate zic2 genes. We compare here the expression patterns of zic2.1,
zic2.2, and zic5. All three genes showed dynamic expression patterns starting
after the initiation of zygotic transcription, predominantly in the developing
neural tube. Compared to zic2.1, zic2.2 was expressed in a similar but distinct
manner during early development, particularly in the retina and the forming
somites. A zic2.2 ortholog has not been identified in other vertebrate species,
suggesting that the zic2.1/zic2.2 pair resulted from a genome duplication event
during the evolution of the zebrafish lineage.

PMID: 15053986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2003 Nov-Dec;61(6):679-87.

[Genetic study of holoprosencephaly].

[Article in French]

Dubourg C(1), Lazaro L, Blayau M, Pasquier L, Durou MR, Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, 35033 Rennes.
christele.dubourg@chu-rennes.fr

Holoprosencephaly (1/16,000 live births; 1/250 conceptuses) is a complex brain
malformation resulting from incomplete cleavage of the prosencephalon, affecting 
both the forebrain and the face. Clinical expressivity is variable, ranging from 
a single cerebral ventricule and cyclopia to clinically unaffected carriers in
familial dominant autosomic holoprosencephaly. The disease is genetically
heterogeneous but additional environmental agents also contribute to the
aetiology of holoprosencephaly. In our cohort of 143 patients, 28 heterozygous
mutations were identified: 15 in the Sonic hedgehog gene (SHH), 6 in ZIC2, 5 in
SIX3, and 2 in TGIF. Functional tests have been set up to validate the
significance of SHH amino acids replacements. Novel phenotypes associated with a 
mutation have been described such as abnormalities of the pituitary gland and
corpus callosum, colobomatous microphthalmia, choanal aperture stenosis and
isolated cleft lip. This study confirms the great genetic heterogeneity of the
disease, the important phenotypic variability in holoprosencephalic families, and
the absence of evident genotype-phenotype correlations.

Copyright John Libbey Eurotext 2003

PMID: 14711609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 1;124A(1):40-7.

Genetic variants in ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC3 are not major risk factors for neural
tube defects in humans.

Klootwijk R(1), Groenen P, Schijvenaars M, Hol F, Hamel B, Straatman H,
Steegers-Theunissen R, Mariman E, Franke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, 6500 HB
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Neural tube defects (NTD) are congenital malformations arising from incomplete
neural tube closure during early embryogenesis. Most NTD in humans show complex
inheritance patterns, with both genetic and environmental factors involved in the
etiology of this malformation. More than 120 mouse models for human NTD exist.
NTD have been observed in mice deficient for the Zic family genes, Zic1, Zic2,
and Zic3. We performed mutation analysis in the human orthologs of these genes
using DNA material from a large panel of NTD patients. In ZIC2 we identified a
deletion of one codon that encodes an alanine residue located in the amino
terminal alanine stretch of the protein. The deletion was present in one patient,
but not in 364 controls. That may suggest a role-albeit small-of this variant in 
the etiology of NTD in humans. Transmission disequilibrium testing of a frequent 
polymorphism in the ZIC2 gene (1059C > T, H353H) in parent-spina bifida aperta
child triads showed no association with NTD. One silent polymorphism (858G > A,
V286V) of unknown significance was identified in ZIC3. Neither mutations nor
polymorphisms were found in the coding region or flanking sequences of ZIC1. Our 
data indicate that ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC3 are not major risk factors for NTD in
humans.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14679585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 15;264(2):391-406.

Zic2 is required for neural crest formation and hindbrain patterning during mouse
development.

Elms P(1), Siggers P, Napper D, Greenfield A, Arkell R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Early Development, Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC, Harwell,
Oxfordshire, OX11 ORD, UK.

The Zic genes are the vertebrate homologues of the Drosophila pair rule gene
odd-paired. It has been proposed that Zic genes play several roles during neural 
development including mediolateral segmentation of the neural plate, neural crest
induction, and inhibition of neurogenesis. Initially during mouse neural
development Zic2 is expressed throughout the neural plate while later on
expression in the neurectoderm becomes restricted to the lateral region of the
neural plate. A hypomorphic allele of Zic2 has demonstrated that in the mouse
Zic2 is required for the timing of neurulation. We have isolated a new allele of 
Zic2 that behaves as a loss of function allele. Analysis of this mutant reveals
two further functions for Zic2 during early neural development. Mutation of Zic2 
results in a delay of neural crest production and a decrease in the number of
neural crest cells that are produced. These defects are independent of
mediolateral segmentation of the neurectoderm and of dorsal neurectoderm
proliferation, both of which occur normally in the mutant embryos. Additionally
Zic2 is required during hindbrain patterning for the normal development of
rhombomeres 3 and 5. This work provides the first genetic evidence that the Zic
genes are involved in neural crest production and the first demonstration that
Zic2 functions during hindbrain patterning.

PMID: 14651926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell. 2003 Sep 5;114(5):545-57.

Zic2 patterns binocular vision by specifying the uncrossed retinal projection.

Herrera E(1), Brown L, Aruga J, Rachel RA, Dolen G, Mikoshiba K, Brown S, Mason
CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia
University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2003 Oct 3;115(1):125.

During CNS development, combinatorial expression of transcription factors
controls neuronal subtype identity and subsequent axonal trajectory. Regulatory
genes designating the routing of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons at the optic
chiasm to the appropriate hemisphere, a pattern critical for proper binocular
vision, have not been identified. Here, we show that the zinc finger
transcription factor Zic2, a vertebrate homolog of the Drosophila gene
odd-paired, is expressed in RGCs with an uncrossed trajectory during the period
when this subpopulation grows from the ventrotemporal retina toward the optic
chiasm. Loss- and gain-of-function analyses indicate that Zic2 is necessary and
sufficient to regulate RGC axon repulsion by cues at the optic chiasm midline.
Moreover, Zic2 expression reflects the extent of binocularity in different
species, suggesting that Zic2 is an evolutionarily conserved determinant of RGCs 
that project ipsilaterally. These data provide evidence for transcriptional
coding of axon pathfinding at the midline.

PMID: 13678579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5143-54.

Xrx1 controls proliferation and neurogenesis in Xenopus anterior neural plate.

Andreazzoli M(1), Gestri G, Cremisi F, Casarosa S, Dawid IB, Barsacchi G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Fisiologia e Biochimica, Università degli Studi di Pisa, Via
Carducci 13, 56010 Ghezzano (Pisa), Italy. andream@dfb.unipi.it

In Xenopus neuroectoderm, posterior cells start differentiating at the end of
gastrulation, while anterior cells display an extended proliferative period and
undergo neurogenesis only at tailbud stage. Recent studies have identified
several important components of the molecular pathways controlling posterior
neurogenesis, but little is known about those controlling the timing and
positioning of anterior neurogenesis. We investigate the role of Xrx1, a homeobox
gene required for eye and anterior brain development, in the control of
proliferation and neurogenesis of the anterior neural plate. Xrx1 is expressed in
the entire proliferative region of the anterior neural plate delimited by cells
expressing the neuronal determination gene X-ngnr-1, the neurogenic gene
X-Delta-1, and the cell cycle inhibitor p27Xic1. Positive and negative signals
position Xrx1 expression to this region. Xrx1 is activated by chordin and
Hedgehog gene signaling, which induce anterior and proliferative fate, and is
repressed by the differentiation-promoting activity of neurogenin and retinoic
acid. Xrx1 is required for anterior neural plate proliferation and, when
overexpressed, induces proliferation, inhibits X-ngnr-1, X-Delta-1 and N-tubulin 
and counteracts X-ngnr-1- and retinoic acid-mediated differentiation. We find
that Xrx1 does not act by increasing lateral inhibition but by inducing the
antineurogenic transcriptional repressors Xhairy2 and Zic2, and by repressing
p27Xic1. The effects of Xrx1 on proliferation, neurogenesis and gene expression
are restricted to the most rostral region of the embryo, implicating this gene as
an anterior regulator of neurogenesis.

PMID: 12975341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Neuron. 2003 Sep 11;39(6):885-8.

Generating X: formation of the optic chiasm.

Rasband K(1), Hardy M, Chien CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah Medical Center,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2003 Sep 11;39(6):919-35.

At the optic chiasm, axons from either eye meet and decide whether to cross
contralaterally or turn back ipsilaterally. Here, the guidance ligand Slit and
its receptor Robo control not whether axons cross (as in other midline
decisions), but where the chiasm forms. Whether axons cross is instead controlled
by the transcription factor Zic2 and the guidance receptor EphB1, as shown by two
papers in the current issues of Neuron and Cell (Herrera et al. and Williams et
al.). Surprisingly, this mechanism is conserved evolutionarily from frogs to
mammals.

PMID: 12971890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Jun;3(3):361-7.

Immunolocalization of Zic2 expression in the developing mouse forebrain.

Brown LY(1), Kottmann AH, Brown S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

The Zic genes are a family of zinc finger transcription factors defined by their 
homology with the Drosophila gene, odd-paired (opa). Zic2 has a critical role in 
forebrain development, as is evidenced by the fact that, in both mice and humans,
diminished expression results in the severe forebrain malformation known as
holoprosencephaly. Published information indicates that Zic2 expression is most
prominent in the dorsal neural tube/spinal cord and in the hindbrain; however,
there is no published description of the pattern of expression of Zic2 in the
developing forebrain where the main Zic2 associated phenotype occurs. Using a
Zic2-specific antiserum, we present new information about the expression of Zic2 
in the developing mouse forebrain. In addition, we show that in sonic hedgehog
(Shh) null mice, the expression of Zic2 is expanded ventrally in some structures 
while absent in others, suggesting that Shh has a role in regulating the
expression of Zic2.

PMID: 12799086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Apr 15;118A(2):384-9.

Partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13 associated with
holoprosencephaly and the Dandy-Walker malformation.

McCormack WM Jr(1), Shen JJ, Curry SM, Berend SA, Kashork C, Pinar H, Potocki L, 
Bejjani BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Room
S434, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Am J Med Genet. 2002 Nov 1;112(4):384-9.

Two patients with partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13,
del(13)(13q21-q34) and del(13)(13q22-q33), respectively, multiple congenital
anomalies including holoprosencephaly (HPE) and the Dandy-Walker malformation
(DWM) are described. The occurrence of HPE and the DWM in both of these patients 
suggests that, in addition to ZIC2, which is important for normal development of 
the forebrain, there is at least one other dosage-sensitive gene in 13q22-q33
that plays an important role in brain development. The DWM is anatomically and
developmentally distinct from HPE. The presence of a DWM in each of these two
patients with partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13 suggests that
haploinsufficiency at a locus in 13q22-q33 may cause this anomaly. These findings
suggest that microdeletions in 13q22-q33 may be found in a proportion of patients
with an apparently isolated DWM. Therefore, careful high-resolution cytogenetic
analysis (550 band level or greater) of 13q22-q33 may be considered in these
patients. Furthermore, future molecular studies of this region may reveal
candidate gene loci for the DWM.

PMID: 12698964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Dev Dyn. 2003 Apr;226(4):702-12.

Expression of ZIC genes in the development of the chick inner ear and nervous
system.

Warner SJ(1), Hutson MR, Oh SH, Gerlach-Bank LM, Lomax MI, Barald KF.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology/Head-Neck
Surgery, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

ZIC genes, vertebrate homologues of the Drosophila pair-rule gene odd-paired
(opa), function in embryonic pattern formation, in the early stages of central
nervous system neurogenesis and in cerebellar maturation. Mouse Zic genes are
expressed in restricted, and in some cases overlapping, patterns during
development, particularly in the central and peripheral nervous systems. We
identified chick ZIC2 in a differential display analysis of the auditory system
designed to find genes up-regulated after noise trauma. In this study, we
examined the expression of chick ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC3 by in situ hybridization in
normal inner ear development and in the tissues that influence its development,
including the hindbrain, the neural crest, and the periotic mesenchyme. Between
Hamburger and Hamilton stages 13 and 24, all three ZIC genes were found in the
dorsal periotic mesenchyme adjacent to the developing inner ear. ZIC1 mRNA was
expressed in the otocyst epithelium between stages 12 and 24, in some sensory
tissue, as well as in a striped pattern in the floorplate of the hindbrain that
appears to be complementary to that of Chordin, a gene known to regulate ZIC
expression in frogs. Chick ZIC genes are also expressed in the neuroectoderm,
paraxial mesenchyme, brain, spinal cord, neural crest, and/or the overlying
ectoderm as well as the limb buds. In general, ZIC1 and ZIC2 expression patterns 
overlapped, although ZIC2 expression was less robust; ZIC3 expression was
minimal. These observations suggest that ZIC genes, in addition to their known
roles in brain development, may play an important role in the development of the 
chick inner ear.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12666207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Curr Opin Neurol. 2003 Apr;16(2):135-41.

Mouse models of holoprosencephaly.

Hayhurst M(1), McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common anomaly of
forebrain development in humans. The pathogenesis of HPE results in a failure of 
the brain hemispheres to separate during early development. Here we review
experimental models of HPE in which some of the genes known to cause HPE in
humans have been disrupted in the mouse.
RECENT FINDINGS: To date, mutations that cause HPE have been identified in seven 
genes. Three of these genes encode members of the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling 
pathway, which regulates the development of ventral structures throughout the
neuraxis. Two other HPE mutations affect signaling by Nodal ligands, which also
play important roles in neural patterning. The roles of the two other known HPE
genes are not yet clear. Analysis of genetically altered mice has revealed that
mutations in other members of the SHH and Nodal signaling pathways also result in
HPE phenotypes.
SUMMARY: Studies of HPE in the mouse have provided a framework for understanding 
key developmental events in human brain development and may provide new candidate
genes for human HPE. Despite this progress, fundamental mysteries remain about
how molecules that pattern ventral brain regions ultimately disrupt the formation
of the cerebral hemispheres in dorsal regions.

PMID: 12644739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Mar 1;117A(2):112-5.

Previously undescribed nonsense mutation in SHH caused autosomal dominant
holoprosencephaly with wide intrafamilial variability.

Marini M(1), Cusano R, De Biasio P, Caroli F, Lerone M, Silengo M, Ravazzolo R,
Seri M, Camera G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G Gaslini, Genova, Italy.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental defect of the forebrain 
and midface in humans, with a frequency of 1/16,000 live births. Different genes 
are implicated in the pathogenesis of HPE; these include SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF,
and human DKK1. We describe here a family with recurrence of autosomal dominant
HPE in different members showing a wide clinical variability. The mother presents
a single central maxillary incisor and mild hypotelorism as signs of the
diseases, while three of her sons were affected by HPE. By direct sequencing and 
restriction analysis of exon 2 of the SHH gene, we have identified a previously
undescribed nonsense mutation at codon 128 (W128X). The identification of this
mutation allowed us to give a prenatal diagnosis in this family and confirms a
wide intrafamilial variability in the phenotypic spectrum.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12567406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Feb 1;116A(4):414-5.

Lack of association between ZIC2 and ZIC3 genes and the risk of neural tube
defects (NTDs) in Hispanic populations.

Zhu H, Junker WM, Finnell RH, Brown S, Shaw GM, Lammer EJ, Canfield M, Hendricks 
K.

PMID: 12522805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Nov 1;112(4):384-9.

Partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13 associated with
holoprosencephaly and the Dandy-Walker malformation.

McCormack WM Jr(1), Shen JJ, Curry SM, Berend SA, Kashork C, Pinar H, Potocki L, 
Bejjani BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Corrected and republished in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Apr 15;118A(2):384-9.

Two patients with partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13,
del(13)(13q21-q34) and del(13)(13q22-q33), respectively, multiple congenital
anomalies including holoprosencephaly (HPE) and the Dandy-Walker malformation
(DWM) are described. The occurrence of HPE and the DWM in both of these patients 
suggests that, in addition to ZIC2, which is important for normal development of 
the forebrain, there is at least one other dosage-sensitive gene in 13q22-q33
that plays an important role in brain development. The DWM is anatomically and
developmentally distinct from HPE. The presence of a DWM in each of these two
patients with partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13 suggests that
haploinsufficiency at a locus in 13q22-q33 may cause this anomaly. These findings
suggest that microdeletions in 13q22-q33 may be found in a proportion of patients
with an apparently isolated DWM. Therefore, careful high-resolution cytogenetic
analysis (550 band level or greater) of 13q22-q33 may be considered in these
patients. Furthermore, future molecular studies of this region may reveal
candidate gene loci for the DWM.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12376941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2002 Mar-Apr;5(2):170-8.

Unusual variant of holoprosencephaly in monosomy 13q.

Marcorelles P(1), Loget P, Fallet-Bianco C, Roume J, Encha-Razavi F, Delezoide
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, CHU, Hôpital Morvan, 29609 Brest Cedex,
France.

The clinical phenotype related to the terminal deletion of the long arm of the
chromosome 13 (the so-called 13q- syndrome) includes a considerable number of
malformations, especially of the brain. This report describes five cases of a
cerebral midline anomaly that leads to a particular clover-shaped type of
holoprosencephaly in 13q- fetuses at different stages of the second and third
trimesters of gestation. Our cases are compared to those in literature reviews.
This malformation has only been described by computer tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging in eight children of various ages and has been called "middle
interhemispheric fusion" or syntelencephaly. Recently, the human gene ZIC2, the
mutation of which leads to holoprosencephaly, has been mapped to the long arm of 
chromosome 13. on band q32. These findings suggest that this particular type of
holoprosencephaly may be related to ZIC2 gene loss of function.

PMID: 11910512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Mar 1;108(2):128-31.

Possible association of NTDs with a polyhistidine tract polymorphism in the ZIC2 
gene.

Brown LY(1), Hodge SE, Johnson WG, Guy SG, Nye JS, Brown S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

Neural tube defects (NTDs) and brain malformations represent a common finding in 
chromosome 13q deletion patients. Hemizygosity for ZIC2, which is located in the 
13q32 critical deletion region, results in holoprosencephaly (HPE) in humans, and
diminished expression of ZIC2 results in HPE as well as lumbosacral NTDs in mice.
Taken together, these observations led us to hypothesize that ZIC2 mutations may 
be a cause of isolated NTD. To test this, we screened 192 NTD patients for
mutations in ZIC2. While we did not find ZIC2 mutations in these patients, we did
find some evidence of a possible association between a histidine tract
polymorphism in ZIC2 and NTDs. Our sample was too small to reach definitive
conclusions, but the evidence is sufficiently intriguing to encourage further
research. If this association is confirmed, subtle alterations in ZIC2 activity
may confer a risk of NTD.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11857562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Prenat Diagn. 2002 Jan;22(1):5-7.

Molecular diagnosis of a novel heterozygous 268C-->T (R90C) mutation in TGIF gene
in a fetus with holoprosencephaly and premaxillary agenesis.

Chen CP(1), Chern SR, Du SH, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, Republic of China. cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

We report the sonographic diagnosis and molecular analysis of holoprosencephaly
(HPE) and premaxillary agenesis in a second-trimester fetus with a 46,XY
karyotype. Mutational sequence analyses for the entire coding region and
exon-intron boundaries of SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF genes identified a novel
heterozygous missense TGIF mutation 268C-->T (CGC-->TGC change) that predicts an 
Arg90Cys substitution in the homeodomain region of TGIF. The proband's parents
did not carry the mutation. The present case is an example of the heterogeneous
entity of the HPE spectrum and demonstrates that adjunctive molecular analyses of
distinct human genes for HPE can reassure genetic counselling by elucidating the 
genetic pathogenesis, especially in cytogenetically normal fetuses affected with 
HPE.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11810641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Child Neurol. 2001 Dec;16(12):918-31.

Neuropathologic research strategies in holoprosencephaly.

Sarnat HB(1), Flores-Sarnat L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
USA. harveyb.sarnat@cshs.org

Hypotheses are presented to explain the pathogenesis of several clinical features
of holoprosencephaly, and neuropathologic approaches to testing these hypotheses 
are suggested. The traditional morphologic classification of holoprosencephaly
into alobar, semilobar, and lobar forms is grades of severity, and each occurs in
all of the genetic mutations known. Of the four defective genes identified as
primary in human holoprosencephaly, three exhibit a ventrodorsal gradient of
expression (SHH, SIX3, and TGIF) and one a dorsoventral gradient (ZIC2). But, in 
addition to the vertical axis, genes expressed in the neural tube also may have
rostrocaudal and mediolateral gradients in the other axes. These other gradients 
may be equally as important as the vertical. If the rostrocaudal gradient extends
as far as the mesencephalic neuromere, it may interfere with the formation,
migration, or apoptosis of the mesencephalic neural crest, which forms membranous
bones of the face, orbits, nose, and parts of the eyes, and may explain the
midfacial hypoplasia seen in many, but not all, children with holoprosencephaly. 
This rostrocaudal gradient also causes noncleavage of the caudate nucleus,
thalamus, and hypothalamus and contributes to the formation of the dorsal cyst of
holoprosencephaly, which is probably derived from an expanded suprapineal recess 
of the 3rd ventricle with secondary dilation of the telencephalic monoventricle
and at times may produce a unique transfontanellar encephalocele. The extent of
the mediolateral gradient may explain the severe disorganization of cerebral
cortical architecture in medial parts of the forebrain and normal cortex in
lateral parts, including the radial glial fibers. This preserved lateral cortex
may explain why some children with holoprosencephaly have better intellectual
function than expected and may also be important in the pathogenesis of epilepsy,
by contrast with malformations such as lissencephaly, in which the entire
cerebral cortex is involved. Epilepsy in some, but not all, cases also may be
related to the sequential maturation of axonal terminals in relation to the
neurons they innervate. Diabetes insipidus is a complication in a majority of
patients; other neuroendocrinopathies occur less frequently. Secondary
down-regulation of the OTP gene or of downstream genes such as BRN2 or SIM1 may
result in failure of terminal differentiation of magnocellular neurons of the
supraoptic and paraventricular hypothalamic nuclei. Disoriented radial glial
fibers or abnormal ependyma may allow aberrant migration of neuroepithelial cells
into the ventricle. A new classification of holoprosencephaly is needed to
integrate morphologic and genetic criteria.

PMID: 11785508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Neurosci. 2002 Jan 1;22(1):218-25.

Zic2 controls cerebellar development in cooperation with Zic1.

Aruga J(1), Inoue T, Hoshino J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.go.jp

Mouse Zic genes encode zinc finger proteins and are expressed in the developing
and mature CNS. Reduced expression of Zic2 in mice results in spina bifida and
holoprosencephaly. However, the disruption of Zic1, a strong homolog of Zic2 that
has an overlapping expression pattern, results in cerebellar malformation with no
apparent abnormalities in the forebrain or in posterior neuropore closure. Here
we revealed that Zic2 and Zic1 cooperatively control cerebellar development by
regulating neuronal differentiation. Both Zic1 and Zic2 are expressed in the
precursor cells of the granule neuron and the neurons in cerebellar nuclei. Mice 
carrying one mutated Zic1 allele together with one mutated Zic2 allele
(Zic1(+/-)Zic2(+/kd)) showed a marked cerebellar folial abnormality similar to,
but distinct from that found in mice homozygous for the Zic1 mutation
(Zic1(-/-)). The Zic1(+/-)Zic2(+/kd) cerebellum is missing a lobule in the
anterior vermis and has a truncation of the most posterior lobule. Expression of 
transverse zonal markers is shifted anteriorly in the developing cerebellum,
indicating that the anterior part of the cerebellum is poorly developed.
Abnormalities in the developing Zic1(+/-)Zic2(+/kd) cerebellum share the
following features with those of the Zic1(-/-) cerebellum: a preceding reduction 
of cell proliferation in the anterior external germinal layer, a reduction in
cyclin D1 expression, and enhanced expression of the mitosis inhibitors p27 and
p16, and enhancement of Wnt7a expression. These results indicate that Zic1 and
Zic2 may have very similar functions in the regulation of cerebellar development.

PMID: 11756505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Dyn. 2001 Dec;222(4):688-93.

zic Gene expression marks anteroposterior pattern in the presumptive neurectoderm
of the zebrafish gastrula.

Grinblat Y(1), Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Anteroposterior (A/P) patterning of the vertebrate neurectoderm begins early
during development. In vitro explant assays have been used to show that an A/P
subdivision of the zebrafish neurectoderm is in place by early gastrulation.
However, no direct markers of this subdivision had been described. We report
isolation of two members of the zic gene family, zic2 and zic3, which mark
distinct regions in the developing nervous system. zic3 is expressed in early
gastrula embryos in a posterior domain, directly demonstrating that A/P pattern
is present in the future neurectoderm by this stage. Analysis of mutants in genes
encoding bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) shows that dorsal restriction of zic3
expression requires intact BMP function, and that posterior restriction of zic3
expression is regulated independently of BMP signaling. These data show an early 
subdivision of the A/P axis in the presumptive neurectoderm.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11748837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Behav Genet. 2001 May;31(3):317-24.

Behavioral abnormalities of Zic1 and Zic2 mutant mice: implications as models for
human neurological disorders.

Ogura H(1), Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Research Laboratories, Eisai Co. Ltd., Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan.

Zic1 and Zic2 encode closely related zinc finger proteins expressed in dorsal
neural tube and its derivatives. In previous studies, we showed that the
homozygous Zic1 null mutation (Zic1-/-) results in cerebellar malformation with
severe ataxia and that holoprosencephaly and spina bifida occur in homozygotes
for Zic2 knockdown mutation (Zic2kd/kd). Since human ZIC2 haploinsufficiency is a
cause of holoprosencephaly, the Zic2kd/kd mice are regarded as an animal model
for holoprosencephaly in humans. In this study, the behavioral characteristics of
the Zic1 and Zic2 mutant mice were investigated in heterozygotes (Zic1-/+ or
Zic2kd/+), and significant abnormalities were found in the hanging, spontaneous
locomotor activity, stationary rod (Zic1-/+), acoustic startle response, and
prepulse inhibition tests (Zic2kd/+). The abnormalities in the Zic1-/+ mice may
be explained in part by the hypotonia caused by hypoplasia of the cerebellar
anterior vermis, and these mice are regarded as a model of Joubert syndrome. In
contrast, the sensorimotor gating abnormality in the Zic2kd/+ mice may be
attributable to the presumed abnormality in the dorsomedial forebrain, which was 
strongly affected in the Zic2kd/kd mice. Zic2kd/+ mice can serve as a model for
diseases involving sensorimotor gating abnormalities, such as schizophrenia.

PMID: 11699604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Genet Couns. 2001;12(3):287-98.

Holoprosencephaly: the Maastricht experience.

Moog U(1), De Die-Smulders CE, Schrander-Stumpel CT, Engelen JJ, Hamers AJ,
Frints S, Fryns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, and Maastricht University, The Netherlands.
ute.moog@gen.unimass.nl

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a developmental field defect with impaired cleavage of
the embryonic forebrain as the cardinal feature. The prevalence is about 1 in
11.000-20.000 in live births and 1 in 250 during embryogenesis. In most cases,
craniofacial abnormalities are associated and reflect in 80% of cases the degree 
of severity. The severity is of marked variability and ranges from cyclopia to
minimal craniofacial dysmorphism, such as mild microcephaly with a single central
incisor. The etiology of HPE is very heterogeneous and comprises environmental
factors (e.g. maternal diabetes) and genetic causes. Approximately 50% of HPE
cases are associated with a cytogenetic abnormality (the most common of which is 
trisomy 13) or a monogenic syndrome. Based on recurrent cytogenetic
abnormalities, there are at least 12 genetic loci that likely contain genes
implicated in the pathogenesis of HPE. Currently, four human HPE genes are known:
SHH at 7q36, ZIC2 at 13q32, SIX3 at 2p21 and TGIF at 18p11.3. Over the past 13
years, 16 patients with HPE have been observed at the Department of Clinical
Genetics at Maastricht. Some of them are briefly presented in order to emphasize 
the spectral nature of HPE and the etiological heterogeneity. One patient
appeared to have a partial 18p deletion due to a maternal cryptic translocation
t(1:18) and, in addition, a SHH mutation. The mildest affected patient presented 
with microcephaly and a single maxillary incisor; she had a submicroscopic 7q
deletion. Finally, we propose a protocol of etiological work-up of HPE cases.

PMID: 11693794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mech Dev. 2001 Sep;107(1-2):119-31.

The Alzheimer-related gene presenilin-1 facilitates sonic hedgehog expression in 
Xenopus primary neurogenesis.

Paganelli AR(1), Ocaña OH, Prat MI, Franco PG, López SL, Morelli L, Adamo AM,
Riccomagno MM, Matsubara E, Shoji M, Affranchino JL, Castaño EM, Carrasco AE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Embriología Molecular, Instituto de Biología Celular y
Neurociencias, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155, 
3 degrees piso (1121), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

We analyzed the influence of presenilins on the genetic cascades that control
neuronal differentiation in Xenopus embryos. Resembling sonic hedgehog (shh)
overexpression, presenilin mRNA injection reduced the number of N-tubulin+
primary neurons and modulated Gli3 and Zic2 according to their roles in
activating and repressing primary neurogenesis, respectively. Presenilin
increased shh expression within its normal domain, mainly in the floor plate,
whereas an antisense X-presenilin-alpha morpholino oligonucleotide reduced shh
expression. Both shh and presenilin promoted cell proliferation and apoptosis,
but the effects of shh were widely distributed, while those resulting from
presenilin injection coincided with the range of shh signaling. We suggest that
presenilin may modulate primary neurogenesis, proliferation, and apoptosis in the
neural plate, through the enhancement of shh signaling.

PMID: 11520668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Hum Genet. 2001 Jul;109(1):1-6.

Identification of novel mutations in SHH and ZIC2 in a South American (ECLAMC)
population with holoprosencephaly.

Orioli IM(1), Castilla EE, Ming JE, Nazer J, Burle de Aguiar MJ, Llerena JC,
Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is genetically heterogeneous with four genes, SIX3, SHH, 
TGIF, and ZIC2 that have been identified to date and that are altered in 12% of
patients. To analyze this prevalence in a South American population-based sample 
(57 HPE cases in 244,511 live and still births or 1 in 4300), we performed a
mutational study of these genes in 30 unrelated children (26 newborns and 4
non-newborns) with HPE being ascertained by ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative 
Study of Congenital Malformations). We identified three novel mutations: two were
missense mutations of the SHH gene (Cys183-->Phe; His140-->Pro); the third
mutation was a 2-bp deletion in the zinc-finger region of the ZIC2 gene. These
molecular results explained 8% (2/26 newborn samples) of the HPE cases in this
South American population-based sample, a proportion similar to our previously
published data from a collection of cases.

PMID: 11479728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr 1;10(8):791-6.

Holoprosencephaly due to mutations in ZIC2: alanine tract expansion mutations may
be caused by parental somatic recombination.

Brown LY(1), Odent S, David V, Blayau M, Dubourg C, Apacik C, Delgado MA, Hall
BD, Reynolds JF, Sommer A, Wieczorek D, Brown SA, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, PH16 Columbia University, New York,
NY 10032, USA.

We report on the prevalence of mutations in the zinc finger transcription factor 
gene, ZIC2, in a group of 509 unrelated individuals with isolated
holoprosencephaly (HPE) and normal chromosomes. Overall, we encountered 16 HPE
patients (from 15 unrelated families) with ZIC2 mutations. Thus, ZIC2 mutation
was the apparent cause of HPE in 3-4% of cases. Seven mutations were frameshifts 
that were predicted to result in loss of function, further supporting the idea
that ZIC2 haploinsufficiency can result in HPE. One mutation, an alanine tract
expansion which is caused by the expansion of an imperfect trinucleotide repeat, 
occurred in seven patients from six different families. In three of those
families, the father was found to be apparently mosaic for the mutation. We
hypothesize that this mutation can arise through errors in somatic recombination,
an extremely unusual mutation mechanism. In addition, one mutation resulted in a 
single amino acid change and one mutation was an in-frame deletion of 12 amino
acids. The central nervous system malformations seen in patients with ZIC2
mutations ranged from alobar HPE (most common) to middle interhemispheric fusion 
defect (one case). Although severe facial anomalies are common in HPE, all of the
patients with ZIC2 mutations had relatively normal faces, suggesting that ZIC2
mutations represent a large proportion of HPE cases without facial malformation.

PMID: 11285244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):6889-92. Epub 2001 Jan 12.

Physical and functional interactions between Zic and Gli proteins.

Koyabu Y(1), Nakata K, Mizugishi K, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic and Gli family proteins are transcription factors that share similar zinc
finger domains. Recent studies indicate that Zic and Gli collaborate in neural
and skeletal development. We provide evidence that the Zic and Gli proteins
physically and functionally interact through their zinc finger domains. Moreover,
Gli proteins were translocated to cell nuclei by coexpressed Zic proteins, and
both proteins regulated each other's transcriptional activity. Our result
suggests that the physical interaction between Zic and Gli is the molecular basis
of their antagonistic or synergistic features in developmental contexts and that 
Zic proteins are potential modulators of the hedgehog-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 11238441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):2180-8. Epub 2000 Oct 26.

Molecular properties of Zic proteins as transcriptional regulators and their
relationship to GLI proteins.

Mizugishi K(1), Aruga J, Nakata K, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic family genes encode zinc finger proteins, which play important roles in
vertebrate development. The zinc finger domains are highly conserved between Zic 
proteins and show a notable homology to those of Gli family proteins. In this
study, we investigated the functional properties of Zic proteins and their
relationship to the GLI proteins. We first established an optimal binding
sequence for Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 proteins by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay-based target selection and mutational analysis. The selected sequence was
almost identical to the GLI binding sequence. However, the binding affinity was
lower than that of GLI. Consistent results were obtained in reporter assays, in
which transcriptional activation by Zic proteins was less dependent on the GLI
binding sequence than GLI1. Moreover, Zic proteins activated a wide range of
promoters irrespective of the presence of a GLI binding sequence. When Zic and
GLI proteins were cotransfected into cultured cells, Zic proteins enhanced or
suppressed sequence-dependent, GLI-mediated transactivation depending on cell
type. Taken together, these results suggest that Zic proteins may act as
transcriptional coactivators and that their function may be modulated by the GLI 
proteins and possibly by other cell type-specific cofactors.

PMID: 11053430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):1881-8. Epub 2000 Oct 18.

Transcription factors Zic1 and Zic2 bind and transactivate the apolipoprotein E
gene promoter.

Salero E(1), Pérez-Sen R, Aruga J, Giménez C, Zafra F.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, 28049 Madrid,
Spain.

We have used the yeast one-hybrid system to identify transcription factors that
bind to specific sequences in proximal regions of the apolipoprotein E gene
promoter. The sequence between -163 and -124, that has been previously defined as
a functional promoter element, was used as a bait to screen a human brain cDNA
library. Ten cDNA clones that encoded portions of the human Zic1 (five clones)
and Zic2 (five clones) transcription factors were isolated. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays confirmed the presence of a binding site for Zic1 and Zic2 
in the -136/-125 region. Displacement of binding with oligonucleotides derived
from adjacent sequences within the APOE promoter revealed the existence of two
additional Zic-binding sequences in this promoter. These sequences were
identified by electrophoretic mobility shift assays and mutational analysis in
regions -65/-54 and -185/-174. Cotransfection of Zic1 and Zic2 expression vector 
and different APOE promoter-luciferase reporter constructs in U87 glioblastoma
cell line showed that the three binding sites partially contributed to the
trans-stimulation of the luciferase reporter. Ectopic expression of Zic1 and Zic2
in U87 cells also trans-stimulated the expression of the endogenous gene,
increasing the amount of apolipoprotein E produced by glial cells. These data
indicate that Zic proteins might contribute to the transcriptional activity of
the apolipoprotein E gene and suggest that apolipoprotein E could mediate some of
the developmental processes in which Zic proteins are involved.

PMID: 11038359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 8;275(49):38863-9.

ZIC2 and Sp3 repress Sp1-induced activation of the human D1A dopamine receptor
gene.

Yang Y(1), Hwang CK, Junn E, Lee G, Mouradian MM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pharmacology Unit, Experimental Therapeutics Branch, NINDS, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1406, USA.

The human D(1A) dopamine receptor is transcribed from a tissue-specific regulated
gene under the control of two promoters. An activator region (AR1) located
between nucleotides -1154 and -1136 (relative to the first ATG) enhances
transcription from the upstream promoter that is active in the brain. In this
investigation, we sought to identify the nuclear factors that regulate the D(1A) 
gene through their binding to AR1 using yeast one-hybrid screening. Sp3 and Zic2 
were among the positive clones isolated. Although Sp1 was not isolated from this 
screening and purified Sp1 alone does not bind to AR1 in gel shift experiments,
this general transcription factor binds to AR1 in the presence of D(1A)
expressing NS20Y nuclear extract and activates the D(1A) promoter. Thus, Sp1
appears to require an unknown factor(s) or post-translational modification to
interact with AR1. On the other hand, Zic2 and Sp3 inhibit Sp1-induced activation
of the D(1A) gene in an AR1-dependent manner. Zic2 and D(1A) genes have
reciprocal brain regional distributions; Zic2 is expressed primarily in the
cerebellum, and D(1A) is highly expressed in corpus striatum. These observations 
collectively suggest that one of the physiologic functions of Zic2 is repression 
of D(1A) gene transcription and that the intracellular balance among Sp1, Sp3 and
Zic2 is important for regulating the tissue-specific expression of this dopamine 
receptor.

PMID: 10984499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Mutat. 2000;16(2):99-108.

Mutations in holoprosencephaly.

Wallis D(1), Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental defect of the forebrain 
and midface in humans. In holoprosencephaly the cerebral hemispheres of the brain
fail to separate into distinct left and right hemispheres. This malformation is
due to the improper specification and formation of the forebrain during early
development. When one considers the great number and kinds of genetic
interactions that must occur to properly pattern the developing forebrain, it is 
not surprising that HPE is extremely heterogeneous. In addition to teratogenic
agents, several genes are implicated as the cause of HPE. At least 12 different
loci have been associated with HPE and now several distinct human genes for
holoprosencephaly have been identified. These genes include Sonic Hedgehog (SHH),
ZIC2, SIX3, and TG-interacting factor (TGIF). Here we present an overview of the 
presently known genes causing human holoprosencephaly. We discuss their
functional role in development of the forebrain and summarize the mutations and
polymorphisms that have been identified within them. Hum Mutat 16:99-108, 2000.
Published 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10923031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nat Genet. 2000 Jun;25(2):205-8.

Mutations in TGIF cause holoprosencephaly and link NODAL signalling to human
neural axis determination.

Gripp KW(1), Wotton D, Edwards MC, Roessler E, Ades L, Meinecke P, Richieri-Costa
A, Zackai EH, Massagué J, Muenke M, Elledge SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Departments of Pediatrics, Genetics
and Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural defect of the developing
forebrain in humans (1 in 250 conceptuses, 1 in 16,000 live-born infants). HPE is
aetiologically heterogeneous, with both environmental and genetic causes. So far,
three human HPE genes are known: SHH at chromosome region 7q36 (ref. 6); ZIC2 at 
13q32 (ref. 7); and SIX3 at 2p21 (ref. 8). In animal models, genes in the Nodal
signalling pathway, such as those mutated in the zebrafish mutants cyclops (refs 
9,10), squint (ref. 11) and one-eyed pinhead (oep; ref. 12), cause HPE. Mice
heterozygous for null alleles of both Nodal and Smad2 have cyclopia. Here we
describe the involvement of the TG-interacting factor (TGIF), a homeodomain
protein, in human HPE. We mapped TGIF to the HPE minimal critical region in
18p11.3. Heterozygous mutations in individuals with HPE affect the
transcriptional repression domain of TGIF, the DNA-binding domain or the domain
that interacts with SMAD2. (The latter is an effector in the signalling pathway
of the neural axis developmental factor NODAL, a member of the transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family.) Several of these mutations cause a loss of
TGIF function. Thus, TGIF links the NODAL signalling pathway to the bifurcation
of the human forebrain and the establishment of ventral midline structures.

PMID: 10835638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 11;97(8):4198-203.

Serological identification of embryonic neural proteins as highly immunogenic
tumor antigens in small cell lung cancer.

Güre AO(1), Stockert E, Scanlan MJ, Keresztes RS, Jäger D, Altorki NK, Old LJ,
Chen YT.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, New York Branch at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Serological analysis of expression cDNA libraries (SEREX) derived from two small 
cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines using pooled sera of SCLC patients led to the 
isolation of 14 genes, including 4 SOX group B genes (SOX1, SOX2, SOX3, and
SOX21) and ZIC2. SOX group B genes and ZIC2 encode DNA-binding proteins; SOX
group B proteins regulate transcription of target genes in the presence of
cofactors, whereas ZIC2 is also suspected to be a transcriptional regulator.
These genes are expressed at early developmental stages in the embryonic nervous 
system, but are down-regulated in the adult. Although SOX2 mRNA can be detected
in some adult tissues, ZIC2 is expressed only in brain and testis, and SOX1,
SOX3, and SOX21 transcripts are not detectable in normal adult tissues. Of SCLC
cell lines tested, 80% expressed ZIC2 mRNA, and SOX1, SOX2, and SOX3 expression
was detected in 40%, 50%, and 10%, respectively. SOX group B and ZIC2 antigens
elicited serological responses in 30-40% of SCLC patients in this series, at
titers up to 1:10(6). In sera from 23 normal adults, no antibody was detected
against SOX group B or ZIC2 proteins except for one individual with low-titer
anti-SOX2 antibody. Seroreactivity against SOX1 and 2 was consistently higher
titered than SOX3 and 21 reactivity, suggesting SOX1 and/or SOX2 as the main
antigens eliciting anti-SOX responses. Although paraneoplastic neurological
syndromes have been associated with several SCLC antigens, neurological symptoms 
have not been observed in patients with anti-SOX or anti-ZIC2 antibodies.

PMCID: PMC18195
PMID: 10760287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Feb 14;90(4):315-9.

Holoprosencephaly: molecular study of a California population.

Nanni L(1), Croen LA, Lammer EJ, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common developmental anomaly of the forebrain and
midface in which the cerebral hemispheres fail to separate into distinct left and
right halves. HPE is extremely heterogeneous. In addition to teratogenic agents, 
several genes are implicated in the cause of HPE. Using samples from a
population-based birth defects registry in California, we performed a mutational 
analysis of the known HPE genes Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), ZIC2, and SIX3, in addition
to two HPE candidate genes, TG-interacting factor (TGIF), and Patched (PTC), on a
group of sporadic HPE patients. This is the first molecular study of HPE in a
population-based sample of patients. Among these patients, a deletion in the
homeodomain of SIX3 and several polymorphisms in SIX3 and TGIF were identified.
No sequence changes were detected in SHH, ZIC2, and PTC. Our results suggest that
mutations in the currently recognized HPE genes may explain <5% of all sporadic
HPE cases.

PMID: 10710230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 15;97(4):1618-23.

Zic2 regulates the kinetics of neurulation.

Nagai T(1), Aruga J, Minowa O, Sugimoto T, Ohno Y, Noda T, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Mutation in human ZIC2, a zinc finger protein homologous to Drosophila
odd-paired, causes holoprosencephaly (HPE), which is a common, severe
malformation of the brain in humans. However, the pathogenesis is largely
unknown. Here we show that reduced expression (knockdown) of mouse Zic2 causes
neurulation delay, resulting in HPE and spina bifida. Differentiation of the most
dorsal neural plate, which gives rise to both roof plate and neural crest cells, 
also was delayed as indicated by the expression lag of a roof plate marker,
Wnt3a. In addition the development of neural crest derivatives such as dorsal
root ganglion was impaired. These results suggest that the Zic2 expression level 
is crucial for the timing of neurulation. Because the Zic2 knockdown mouse is the
first mutant with HPE and spina bifida to survive to the perinatal period, the
mouse will promote analyses of not only the neurulation but also the pathogenesis
of human HPE.

PMCID: PMC26484
PMID: 10677508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Keio J Med. 1999 Sep;48(3):111-23.

Mammalian neural induction and brain pattern formation.

Mikoshiba K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

In summary, as I mentioned, I have long be focusing on the cerebellum. I first
talked about the IP3 receptor in relation to the Purkinje cells. Ca2+ release
through IP3 receptor regulates the fertilization, cell division, and
dorso-ventral axis formation. It is also involved in learning and memory system. 
Gene called Zic is expressed in granule cells that make synaptic contact with
Purkinje cells. Zic1 is one of the genes important in cerebellar pattern
formation. Zic2 is essential in making our brain. Zic3 is important in the right 
and left axis formation. Purkinje cell and granule cell positioning are really
nicely determined. But we now have two genes that determine the positioning, that
may help to form a very nice and beautiful structure of the cerebellum. The
principles and evidences obtained through the study of the cerebellum are found
to be applied to other part of the brain, presumably because the cerebellum is
phylogenetically old and plays an important information processing for motor
movement.

PMID: 10535272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Genet Metab. 1999 Oct;68(2):126-38.

Molecular mechanisms of holoprosencephaly.

Wallis DE(1), Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Genetics, and Neurology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19104-4399, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental defect of the forebrain 
in humans. Several distinct human genes for holoprosencephaly have now been
identified. They include Sonic hedgehog (SHH), ZIC2, and SIX3. Many additional
genes involved in forebrain development are rapidly being cloned and
characterized in model vertebrate organisms. These include Patched (Ptc),
Smoothened (Smo), cubitus interuptus (ci)/Gli, wingless (wg/Wnt, decapentaplegic 
(dpp)/BMP, Hedgehog interacting protein (Hip), nodal, Smads, One-eyed pinhead
(Oep), and TG-Interacting Factor (TGIF). However, further analysis is needed
before their roles in HPE can be established. Here we present an overview of the 
presently known genes causing human holoprosencephaly and describe candidate
genes involved in forebrain development identified in other systems. A model is
discussed for how these genes may interact within and between several different
signaling pathways to direct the formation of the forebrain.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10527664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Development. 1999 Oct;126(19):4257-65.

Functional association of retinoic acid and hedgehog signaling in Xenopus primary
neurogenesis.

Franco PG(1), Paganelli AR, López SL, Carrasco AE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Embriología Molecular, Instituto de Biología Celular y
Neurociencias, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155, 
1121, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Previous work has shown that the posteriorising agent retinoic acid can
accelerate anterior neuronal differentiation in Xenopus laevis embryos
(Papalopulu, N. and Kintner, C. (1996) Development 122, 3409-3418). To elucidate 
the role of retinoic acid in the primary neurogenesis cascade, we investigated
whether retinoic acid treatment of whole embryos could change the spatial
expression of a set of genes known to be involved in neurogenesis. We show that
retinoic acid expands the N-tubulin, X-ngnr-1, X-MyT1, X-&Dgr;-1 and Gli3 domains
and inhibits the expression of Zic2 and sonic hedgehog in the neural ectoderm,
whereas a retinoid antagonist produces opposite changes. In contrast, sonic and
banded hedgehog overexpression reduced the N-tubulin stripes, enlarged the neural
plate at the expense of the neural crest, downregulated Gli3 and upregulated
Zic2. Thus, retinoic acid and hedgehog signaling have opposite effects on the
prepattern genes Gli3 and Zic2 and on other genes acting downstream in the
neurogenesis cascade. In addition, retinoic acid cannot rescue the inhibitory
effect of Notch(ICD), Zic2 or sonic hedgehog on primary neurogenesis. Our results
suggest that retinoic acid acts very early, upstream of sonic hedgehog, and we
propose a model for regulation of differentiation and proliferation in the neural
plate, showing that retinoic acid might be activating primary neurogenesis by
repressing sonic hedgehog expression.

PMID: 10477294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nat Genet. 1998 Oct;20(2):180-3.

Holoprosencephaly due to mutations in ZIC2, a homologue of Drosophila odd-paired.

Brown SA(1), Warburton D, Brown LY, Yu CY, Roeder ER, Stengel-Rutkowski S,
Hennekam RC, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New York, New
York, USA. brown@cuccfa.ccc.columbia.edu

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural anomaly of the human brain 
and is one of the anomalies seen in patients with deletions and duplications of
chromosome 13. On the basis of molecular analysis of a series of patients with
hemizygous deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13, we have defined a discrete
region in band 13q32 where deletion leads to major developmental anomalies (the
13q32 deletion syndrome). This approximately 1-Mb region lies between markers
D135136 and D13S147. Patients in which this region is deleted usually have major 
congenital malformations, including brain anomalies such as HPE or exencephaly,
and digital anomalies such as absent thumbs. We now report that human ZIC2 maps
to this critical deletion region and that heterozygous mutations in ZIC2 are
associated with HPE. Haploinsufficiency for ZIC2 is likely to cause the brain
malformations seen in 13q deletion patients.

PMID: 9771712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mech Dev. 1998 Jul;75(1-2):43-51.

Xenopus Zic family and its role in neural and neural crest development.

Nakata K(1), Nagai T, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center and Brain
Science Institute, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

We characterized two new members of the Zic family, Xenopus Zic1 and Zic2. They
are very similar to mouse Zic1 and Zic2 in the protein coding region including
the zinc finger domain. In early gastrula, Zic1 expression was restricted to the 
prospective neural plate region whereas Zic2 was expressed widely in the
ectoderm. We observed enhanced neural and neural crest-derived tissue formation
in the Zic1 or Zic2 overexpressed embryos and neural and neural crest marker
induction in the Zic1 or Zic2 overexpressed animal cap explants. Our findings
suggest that Zic1 and Zic2 have essentially the same properties as Zic3 and that 
the Xenopus Zic family may act cooperatively in the initial phase of neural and
neural crest development.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 9739105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nature. 1998 Jun 11;393(6685):579-83.

Gli/Zic factors pattern the neural plate by defining domains of cell
differentiation.

Brewster R(1), Lee J, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program, Department of Cell
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York 10016, USA.

Three cell types differentiate in the early frog neural plate: neural crest at
the lateral edges, floorplate at the midline and primary neurons in three
bilateral stripes. Floorplate cells and ventral neurons are induced by Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) and neural crest and dorsal neurons are induced by epidermal
factors such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). Neurogenesis in a subset of
cells within the stripes involves lateral inhibition. However, the process by
which pools of precursors are defined in stereotypic domains in response to
inductive signals is unknown. Here we show that frog Zic2 encodes a zinc-finger
transcription factor of the Gli superfamily which is expressed in stripes that
alternate with those in which primary neurons differentiate and overlap the
domains of floorplate and neural crest progenitors. Zic2 inhibits neurogenesis
and induces neural crest differentiation. Conversely, Gli proteins are widely
expressed, induce neurogenesis and inhibit neural crest differentiation. Zic2 is 
therefore a vertebrate pre-pattern gene, encoding anti-neurogenic and
crest-inducing functions that counteract the neurogenic but not the
floorplate-inducing activity of Gli proteins. We propose that the combined
function of Gli/Zic genes responds to inductive signals and induces patterned
neural cell differentiation.

PMID: 9634234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Dev Biol. 1997 Feb 15;182(2):299-313.

The expression of the mouse Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 gene suggests an essential role 
for Zic genes in body pattern formation.

Nagai T(1), Aruga J, Takada S, Günther T, Spörle R, Schughart K, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

We examined the expression of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 genes in the mouse embryo by
means of in situ hybridization. Zic genes were found as a group of genes coding
for zinc finger proteins that are expressed in a restricted manner in the adult
mouse cerebellum. We showed that the genes are the vertebrate homologues of
Drosophila odd-paired, which may play an essential role in parasegmental
subdivision and in visceral mesoderm development. The expression of the three Zic
genes was first detected at gastrulation in a spatially restricted manner. At
neurulation, the expression became restricted to the dorsal neural ectoderm and
dorsal paraxial mesoderm. During organogenesis, the three genes were expressed in
specific regions of several developing organs, including dorsal areas of the
brain, spinal cord, paraxial mesenchyme, and epidermis, the marginal zone of the 
neural retina and distal regions of the developing limb. For all stages,
significant differences in the spatial expression of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 were
observed. Furthermore, the expression of Zic genes in Pax3, Wnt-1, and Wnt-3a
mutant embryos suggested that Zic genes are not primarily regulated by the three 
genes which were expressed in dorsal areas similar to Zic genes. However, in open
brain, a mutant with severe neural tube defects, and in the Wnt-3a mutant mice,
the expression of Zic genes was changed. The changed expression pattern in Wnt-3a
mutant mice suggests that Zic genes in the neural tube are regulated by the
factors from notochord. Our findings suggest that Zic genes are involved in many 
developmental processes. Furthermore, analysis of gene expression patterns in
different mouse mutants indicated that Zic genes may act upstream of many known
developmental regulatory genes.

PMID: 9070329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gene. 1996 Jun 26;172(2):291-4.

Identification and characterization of Zic4, a new member of the mouse Zic gene
family.

Aruga J(1), Yozu A, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y, Chapman VM, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN) Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
jaruga@rtc.riken.go.jp

The mouse Zic genes encode zinc-finger (Zf) proteins expressed only in the
cerebellum of the adult brain. The genes are the vertebrate homologues of the
Drosophila pair-rule gene, odd-paired (opa). We identified a novel gene, Zic4,
which belongs to the Zic gene family, through a genomic and cDNA cloning study.
Zic4 is highly similar to Zic1, Zic2 and Zic3, especially in its Zf motif. An
analysis of the genomic organization of Zic4 showed that the gene shares a common
exon-intron boundary with Zic1, Zic2, Zic3 and opa. The chromosomal location of
Zic4 was determined to be mouse chromosome 9 in the vicinity of Zic1, using an
interspecific backcross panel. An RNase protection study showed that Zic4 is
expressed only in the cerebellum during the adult stage, as are the other Zic
genes. The temporal profile of mRNA expression in the developing cerebellum is
similar to that of Zic3 which has a peak on postnatal day 5. These findings
suggest that Zic4 is a gene which works cooperatively with other Zic genes during
cerebellar development.

PMID: 8682319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 12;271(2):1043-7.

The mouse zic gene family. Homologues of the Drosophila pair-rule gene
odd-paired.

Aruga J(1), Nagai T, Tokuyama T, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y, Chapman VM, Mikoshiba 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Ibaraki,
Japan.

The mouse Zic gene, which encodes a zinc finger protein, is expressed in the
developing or matured central nervous system in a highly restricted manner. We
identified two novel Zic-related genes (Zic2, Zic3) through genomic and cDNA
cloning. Both genes are highly similar to Zic(1), especially in their zinc finger
motif. A comparison of genomic organization among the three Zic genes showed that
they share common exon-intron boundaries and belong to the same gene family .
Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 were determined to mouse chromosome 9, 14, and X using an
interspecific backcross panel. Northern blotting and ribonuclease protection
showed that Zic2 and Zic3 are expressed in a restricted manner in the cerebellum 
at the adult stage. However, the temporal profile of the mRNA expression in the
developing cerebella differ in the three Zic genes. Furthermore, we found that
the Drosophila pair-rule gene, odd-paired is highly homologous to the Zic gene
family. The similarity was not only the zinc finger motif, but also the
exon-intron boundary was the same as those of mouse Zic gene family. These
findings suggest that the Zic gene family and Drosophila odd-paired are derived
from a common ancestral gene.

PMID: 8557628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


