
1. Poult Sci. 2016 Apr;95(4):912-9. doi: 10.3382/ps/pev361. Epub 2016 Feb 15.

Transcriptional regulation of cathelicidin genes in chicken bone marrow cells.

Lee SI(1), Jang HJ(2), Jeon MH(3), Lee MO(4), Kim JS(3), Jeon IS(3), Byun SJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, RDA,
1500, Kongjwipatjwi-ro, Iseo-myeon, Wanju-gun, Jeollabuk-do, 565-851, Republic of
Korea Department of Animal Resource and Science, Dankook University, Cheonan,
Choongnam, 330-714, Republic of Korea. (2)College of Pharmacy, Dankook
University, 119 Dandae-ro, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714, Republic of Korea.
(3)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, RDA,
1500, Kongjwipatjwi-ro, Iseo-myeon, Wanju-gun, Jeollabuk-do, 565-851, Republic of
Korea. (4)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843-4467. (5)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of
Animal Science, RDA, 1500, Kongjwipatjwi-ro, Iseo-myeon, Wanju-gun, Jeollabuk-do,
565-851, Republic of Korea pcs1778@korea.kr.

Cathelicidins form a family of vertebrate-specific immune molecules with an
evolutionarily conserved gene structure. We analyzed the expression patterns of
cathelicidin genes (CAMP, CATH3, and CATHB1) in chicken bone marrow cells (BMCs) 
and chicken embryonic fibroblasts (CEFs). We found that CAMP and CATHB1 were
significantly up-regulated in BMCs, whereas the expression of CATH3 did not
differ significantly between BMCs and CEFs. To study the mechanism underlying the
up-regulation of cathelicidin genes in BMCs, we predicted the transcription
factors (TFs) that bind to the 5'-flanking regions of cathelicidin genes. CEBPA, 
EBF1, HES1, MSX1, and ZIC3 were up-regulated in BMCs compared to CEFs.
Subsequently, when a siRNA-mediated knockdown assay was performed for MSX1, the
expression of CAMP and CATHB1 was decreased in BMCs. We also showed that the
transcriptional activity of the CAMP promoter was decreased by mutation of the
MSX1-binding sites present within the 5'-flanking region of CAMP. These results
increase our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms controlling cathelicidin 
genes in BMCs.

© 2016 Poultry Science Association Inc.

PMID: 26908883  [PubMed - in process]


2. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 Feb 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Underlying genetic factors of the VATER/VACTERL association with special emphasis
on the "Renal" phenotype.

Reutter H(1,)(2), Hilger AC(3), Hildebrandt F(4), Ludwig M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53127,
Bonn, Germany. reutter@uni-bonn.de. (2)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric
Intensive Care, Children's Hospital-University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
reutter@uni-bonn.de. (3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53127, Bonn, Germany. (4)Department of Medicine, Boston
Children's Hospital-Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of
Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The acronym VATER/VACTERL association (OMIM #192350) refers to the rare
non-random co-occurrence of the following component features (CFs): vertebral
defects (V), anorectal malformations (A), cardiac defects (C), tracheoesophageal 
fistula with or without esophageal atresia (TE), renal malformations (R), and
limb defects (L). According to epidemiological studies, the majority of patients 
with VATER/VACTERL association present with a "Renal" phenotype comprising a
large spectrum of congenital renal anomalies. This finding is supported by
evidence linking all of the human disease genes for the VATER/VACTERL association
identified to date, namely, FGF8, FOXF1, HOXD13, LPP, TRAP1, and ZIC3, with renal
malformations. Here we review these genotype-phenotype correlations and suggest
that the elucidation of the genetic causes of the VATER/VACTERL association will 
ultimately provide insights into the genetic causes of the complete spectrum of
congenital renal anomalies per se.

PMID: 26857713  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):690-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.082. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

MiR-564 functions as a tumor suppressor in human lung cancer by targeting ZIC3.

Yang B(1), Jia L(2), Guo Q(3), Ren H(1), Hu D(1), Zhou X(1), Ren Q(1), Hu Y(4),
Xie T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hubei Cancer Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei 430079, China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Wuhan, Hubei 430079, 
China. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fujian Provincial Cancer Hospital,
Provincial Clinical College of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350000, 
China. (4)Department of Oncology, Hubei Cancer Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei 430079,
China. Electronic address: huyp1989@163.com. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology,
Hubei Cancer Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei 430079, China. Electronic address:
xietao930@hotmail.com.

Although miR-564 was reported to be dysregulated in human malignancy, the
function and mechanism of miR-564 in tumorigenesis remains unknown. In the
present study, we found that miR-564 frequently downregulated in lung cancer
cells and significantly inhibited cell proliferation, cell cycle progression,
motility, and the tumorigenicity of lung cancer cells. Moreover, we identified
zic family member 3 (ZIC3) as a direct target of miR-564. ZIC3 overexpression
impaired the suppressive effects of miR-564 on the capacity of lung cancer cells 
for proliferation and motility. Finally, we detected the expression level of
miR-564 and ZIC3 protein in tissue specimens, and found a significant negative
correlation between them. Patients with low levels of miR-564 showed a poorer
overall survival. Taken together, our present study revealed the tumor suppressor
role of miR-564, indicating restoration of miR-564 as a potential therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of lung cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26498524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;61(2):157-62. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.126. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Genetic mutation analysis in Japanese patients with non-syndromic congenital
heart disease.

Yoshida A(1,)(2), Morisaki H(1,)(2,)(3), Nakaji M(1,)(3), Kitano M(4), Kim KS(5),
Sagawa K(6), Ishikawa S(6), Satokata I(7), Mitani Y(8), Kato H(5), Hamaoka K(9), 
Echigo S(4), Shiraishi I(4), Morisaki T(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Genetics, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center Research Institute, Suita, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Genetics,
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Pathophysiology, Osaka University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Suita, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, National Cerebral 
and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (5)Division of Cardiology, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Fukuoka Children's Hospital Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(7)Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Japan. (9)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Nephrology, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyoto,
Japan.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect occurring in
humans and some transcriptional factors have been identified as causative.
However, additional mutation analysis of these genes is necessary to develop
effective diagnostic and medical treatment methods. We conducted sequence
analysis of the coding regions of NKX2.5, GATA4, TBX1, TBX5, TBX20, CFC1 and ZIC3
in 111 Japanese patients with non-syndromic CHD and 9 of their relatives. All
patient samples were also analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification using probes involved in chromosome deletion related to CHD. Five
novel variations of TBX5, GATA4 and TBX20 were detected in 6 of the patients,
whereas none were found in 200 controls. The TBX5 variation p.Pro108Thr, located 
in the T-box domain, was identified in a patient with tricuspid atresia, an
exon-intron boundary variation of GATA4 (IVS4+5G>A) was detected in a Tetralogy
of Fallot patient and an 8p23 microdeletion was detected in one patient with
atrioventricular septal defect and psychomotor delay. A total of seven
non-synonymous polymorphisms were found in the patients and controls.
Accumulation of novel variations of genes involving the cardiac development may
be required for better understanding of CHD.

PMID: 26490186  [PubMed - in process]


5. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 Sep 22;6:182. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0173-3.

Polyphenols from marine brown algae target radiotherapy-coordinated EMT and
stemness-maintenance in residual pancreatic cancer.

Aravindan S(1,)(2), Ramraj SK(3), Somasundaram ST(4), Herman TS(5), Aravindan
N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Sciences, Center of Advance Study in Marine Biology,
Annamalai University, Parangipettai, TN, 608 502, India. saravind@ouhsc.edu.
(2)Stephenson Cancer Center, 975 NE 10th Street, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104-5419,
USA. saravind@ouhsc.edu. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Boulevard, Oklahoma City,
OK, 73104, USA. sramraj@ouhsc.edu. (4)Department of Marine Sciences, Center of
Advance Study in Marine Biology, Annamalai University, Parangipettai, TN, 608
502, India. drstscas@yahoo.com. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Boulevard, Oklahoma
City, OK, 73104, USA. therman@ouhsc.edu. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Boulevard,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. naravind@ouhsc.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Therapy-associated onset of stemness-maintenance in surviving
tumor-cells dictates tumor relapse/recurrence. Recently, we recognized the
anti-pancreatic cancer (PC) potential of seaweed polyphenol manifolds and
narrowed down three superior drug-deliverables that could serve as adjuvants and 
benefit PC cure. Utilizing the PC- cancer stem cells (PC-CSCs) grown ex vivo and 
mouse model of residual-PC, we investigated the benefits of seaweed polyphenols
in regulating stemness-maintenance.
METHODS: ALDH(+)CD44(+)CD24(+) PC-CSCs from Panc-1, Panc-3.27, MiaPaCa-2, or
BxPC-3 cells-derived xenografts grown ex vivo were either mock-irradiated,
exposed to fractionated irradiation (FIR, 2Gy/D for 5 days), treated with
polyphenols (100 µg/ml) of Hormophysa triquerta (HT-EA), Spatoglossum asperum
(SA-EA) or Padina tetrastromatica (PT-EA) with/without FIR were examined for cell
viability, transcription of 93 stem-cell-related molecules (QPCR profiling).
Polyphenol-dependent regulation of FIR-transactivated Oct4, Zic3, EIF4C, Nanog,
and LIF (QPCR) and functional translation of Nanog, SOX2, and OCT3/4
(immunoblotting) were examined in Panc-1/Panc-3.27/MiaPaCa-2/BxPC-3-xenografts
derived PC-CSCs. Effect of seaweed-polyphenols in the regulation of EMT
(N-Cadherin), pluripotency- (SOX2, OCT3/4, Nanog) and stemness-maintenance
(PI3KR1, LIF, CD44) in therapy (FIR, 2Gy/D for 5D/wk for 3-weeks) resistant
residual tumors were examined by tissue microarray construction and automated
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Ex vivo exposure of PC-CSCs to SA-EA, PT-EA and HT-EA exhibit
dose-dependent inhibition of cell viability. FIR amplified the transcription of
69, 80, 74 and 77 stem-cell related genes in MiaPaCa-2-, Panc-1-, Panc-3.27- and 
BXPC3-established xenograft-derived ALDH(+)CD44(+)CD24(+)PC-CSCs. Treatment with 
SA-EA, PT-EA, or HT-EA completely suppressed FIR-activated stem-cell
transcriptional machinery in ALDH(+)CD44(+)CD24(+)PC-CSCs established from
MiaPaCa-2, Panc-1, Panc-3.27 and BXPC3 xenografts. QPCR validated EIF4C, OCT3/4, 
Nanog, LIF, and ZIC3 transcriptional profile outcomes. Nanog, Sox2, and OCT3/4
immunoblotting affirmed the PC-CSC radiosensitizing benefit of seaweed
polyphenols. Residual-PC tissues microarrayed and immunostained after in vivo
treatments recognized complete regulation of FIR-induced SOX2, OCT3/4, Nanog,
LIF, CD44, PIK3R1, N-Cadherin, and E-Cadherin with SA-EA, PT-EA, and HT-EA.
CONCLUSIONS: These data, for the first time, documented the
EMT/stemness-maintenance in therapy-resistant PC-CSCs. Further, the data suggest 
that seaweed polyphenols may inhibit PC relapse/recurrence by targeting
therapy-orchestrated stem-cell signaling in residual cells.

PMCID: PMC4578749
PMID: 26395574  [PubMed - in process]


6. Hum Mutat. 2015 Dec;36(12):1150-4. doi: 10.1002/humu.22859. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

Targeted Resequencing of 29 Candidate Genes and Mouse Expression Studies
Implicate ZIC3 and FOXF1 in Human VATER/VACTERL Association.

Hilger AC(1), Halbritter J(2,)(3), Pennimpede T(4,)(5), van der Ven A(1,)(2),
Sarma G(6), Braun DA(2), Porath JD(2), Kohl S(2), Hwang DY(2), Dworschak
GC(1,)(2), Hermann BG(4), Pavlova A(7), El-Maarri O(7,)(8), Nöthen MM(1,)(9),
Ludwig M(10), Reutter H(1,)(6), Hildebrandt F(2,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department 
of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology,
University Clinic Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (4)Department of Developmental
Genetics, Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada. (6)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care,
Children's Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (7)Institute of
Experimental Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany. (8)Department of Natural Sciences, Lebanese American University,
Byblos/Beirut, Lebanon. (9)Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (10)Department of Clinical Chemistry and
Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (11)Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland.

The VATER/VACTERL association describes the combination of congenital anomalies
including vertebral defects, anorectal malformations, cardiac defects,
tracheoesophageal fistula with or without esophageal atresia, renal
malformations, and limb defects. As mutations in ciliary genes were observed in
diseases related to VATER/VACTERL, we performed targeted resequencing of 25
ciliary candidate genes as well as disease-associated genes (FOXF1, HOXD13, PTEN,
ZIC3) in 123 patients with VATER/VACTERL or VATER/VACTERL-like phenotype. We
detected no biallelic mutation in any of the 25 ciliary candidate genes; however,
identified an identical, probably disease-causing ZIC3 missense mutation
(p.Gly17Cys) in four patients and a FOXF1 de novo mutation (p.Gly220Cys) in a
further patient. In situ hybridization analyses in mouse embryos between E9.5 and
E14.5 revealed Zic3 expression in limb and prevertebral structures, and Foxf1
expression in esophageal, tracheal, vertebral, anal, and genital tubercle
tissues, hence VATER/VACTERL organ systems. These data provide strong evidence
that mutations in ZIC3 or FOXF1 contribute to VATER/VACTERL.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4643331 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26294094  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22460-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.675595. Epub
2015 Jul 29.

ETS-related transcription factors ETV4 and ETV5 are involved in proliferation and
induction of differentiation-associated genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells.

Akagi T(1), Kuure S(2), Uranishi K(3), Koide H(3), Costantini F(4), Yokota T(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)the Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Helsinki, 00790 Helsinki, Finland, and. (3)From the Department of Stem Cell
Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan. (4)the Department of Genetics
and Development, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032.
(5)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tyokota@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

The pluripotency and self-renewal capacity of embryonic stem (ES) cells is
regulated by several transcription factors. Here, we show that the ETS-related
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5) are specifically expressed in
undifferentiated ES cells, and suppression of Oct3/4 results in down-regulation
of Etv4/5. Simultaneous deletion of Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5 double knock-out (dKO))
in ES cells resulted in a flat, epithelial cell-like appearance, whereas the
morphology changed into compact colonies in a 2i medium (containing two
inhibitors for GSK3 and MEK/ERK). Expression levels of self-renewal marker genes,
including Oct3/4 and Nanog, were similar between wild-type and dKO ES cells,
whereas proliferation of Etv4/5 dKO ES cells was decreased with overexpression of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (p16/p19, p15, and p57). A differentiation
assay revealed that the embryoid bodies derived from Etv4/5 dKO ES cells were
smaller than the control, and expression of ectoderm marker genes, including
Fgf5, Sox1, and Pax3, was not induced in dKO-derived embryoid bodies. Microarray 
analysis demonstrated that stem cell-related genes, including Tcf15, Gbx2, Lrh1, 
Zic3, and Baf60c, were significantly repressed in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells. The
artificial expression of Etv4 and/or Etv5 in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells induced
re-expression of Tcf15 and Gbx2. These results indicate that Etv4 and Etv5,
potentially through regulation of Gbx2 and Tcf15, are involved in the ES cell
proliferation and induction of differentiation-associated genes in ES cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566222 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26224636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Nov;167A(11):2563-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37234. Epub 2015 
Jul 14.

Is VACTERL a laterality defect?

Sadler TW(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Senior Fellow, Greenwood Genetics Center, Grennwood, South Carolina.
(2)Adjunct Professor of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.

To date the etiology of the association called VACTERL remains a mystery.
Interestingly, clues as to the origin of this collection of defects may reside in
an old hypothesis concerning the midline as a developmental field as postulated
by Dr. John Opitz. This theory suggested that the midline was not a separate
entity, but could be influenced by other developmental signals. With new
information concerning the origin of the left-right axis (laterality) and the
importance of communications between this axis and the cranio-caudal
(anterior-posterior) axis for normal development, it has become clear that
coordination of the molecular signals responsible for specification of these
domains is essential for normal development. In fact, if the signals regulating
laterality are disrupted, then midline and other defects can occur as has been
observed in cases of heterotaxy, presumably because of a disruption in this
coordinated signaling effort. Thus, the origins of the defects commonly observed 
in the VACTERL association may be due to altered signaling responsible for
establishing the left-right axis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26171769  [PubMed - in process]


9. Curr Genomics. 2015 Apr;16(2):117-27. doi: 10.2174/1389202916666150205124519.

Changing Faces of Transcriptional Regulation Reflected by Zic3.

Winata CL(1), Kondrychyn I(2), Korzh V(3).

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland; Max
Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany. (2)National
Centre for Biological Sciences, Bangalore, India. (3)Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore; Department 
of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

The advent of genomics in the study of developmental mechanisms has brought a
trove of information on gene datasets and regulation during development, where
the Zic family of zinc-finger proteins plays an important role. Genomic analysis 
of the modes of action of Zic3 in pluripotent cells demonstrated its requirement 
for maintenance of stem cells pluripotency upon binding to the proximal
regulatory regions (promoters) of genes associated with cell pluripotency (Nanog,
Sox2, Oct4, etc.) as well as cell cycle, proliferation, oncogenesis and early
embryogenesis. In contrast, during gastrulation and neurulation Zic3 acts by
binding the distal regulatory regions (enhancers, etc) associated with control of
gene transcription in the Nodal and Wnt signaling pathways, including genes that 
act to break body symmetry. This illustrates a general role of Zic3 as a
transcriptional regulator that acts not only alone, but in many instances in
conjunction with other transcription factors. The latter is done by binding to
adjacent sites in the context of multi-transcription factor complexes associated 
with regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC4467302
PMID: 26085810  [PubMed]


10. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;24(2):228-36. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.105. Epub 2015 May
27.

A systematic variant screening in familial cases of congenital heart defects
demonstrates the usefulness of molecular genetics in this field.

El Malti R(1), Liu H(1,)(2), Doray B(3), Thauvin C(4), Maltret A(5), Dauphin
C(6), Gonçalves-Rocha M(7), Teboul M(8), Blanchet P(9), Roume J(10), Gronier
C(11), Ducreux C(12), Veyrier M(12), Marçon F(13), Acar P(14), Lusson JR(6), Levy
M(5), Beyler C(15), Vigneron J(16), Cordier-Alex MP(17), Heitz F(18), Sanlaville 
D(17,)(19), Bonnet D(5,)(20), Bouvagnet P(1,)(2,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Cardiogénétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (2)EA 4173
Université Lyon 1, France and Hôpital Nord Ouest, Lyon, France. (3)Service de
Génétique Médicale, CHU Saint Denis, Saint Denis, France. (4)Centre de Génétique,
Hôpital d'Enfants, CHU Dijon and EA4271, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France. 
(5)Service de Cardiologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(6)Service de Cardiologie, Hôpital Gabriel Montpied, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(7)Unidade de Genética Médica, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhaes,
Porto, Portugal. (8)Laboratoire de Biologie Clinique, Nancy, France. (9)Unité
Fonctionnelle Génétique Prénatale et Foetopathologique, CHRU, Montpellier,
France. (10)Unité de Génétique Médicale, Centre Intercommunal Poissy-St-Germain
en Laye, Poissy, France. (11)Cardiologie Pédiatrique et Ftale, Strasbourg,
France. (12)Service de Cardiologie Pédiatrique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France. (13)Cardiologie Infantile, Hôpital Brabois, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France.
(14)Pédiatrie Cardiologie, Hôpital d'Enfants, Toulouse, France. (15)Unité de
Cardiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. (16)Unité
Fonctionnelle de Génétique, Maternité A Pinard, Nancy, France. (17)Service de
Génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (18)Clinique Pasteur, Toulouse,
France. (19)CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292 and INSERM U1028, Université Lyon 1, Lyon,
France. (20)UMR_S 765 INSERM and Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.

The etiology of congenital heart defect (CHD) combines environmental and genetic 
factors. So far, there were studies reporting on the screening of a single gene
on unselected CHD or on familial cases selected for specific CHD types. Our goal 
was to systematically screen a proband of familial cases of CHD on a set of
genetic tests to evaluate the prevalence of disease-causing variant
identification. A systematic screening of GATA4, NKX2-5, ZIC3 and Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) P311 Kit was setup on the proband
of 154 families with at least two cases of non-syndromic CHD. Additionally, ELN
screening was performed on families with supravalvular arterial stenosis.
Twenty-two variants were found, but segregation analysis confirmed unambiguously 
the causality of 16 variants: GATA4 (1 ×), NKX2-5 (6 ×), ZIC3 (3 ×), MLPA (2 ×)
and ELN (4 ×). Therefore, this approach was able to identify the causal variant
in 10.4% of familial CHD cases. This study demonstrated the existence of a de
novo variant even in familial CHD cases and the impact of CHD variants on adult
cardiac condition even in the absence of CHD. This study showed that the
systematic screening of genetic factors is useful in familial CHD cases with up
to 10.4% elucidated cases. When successful, it drastically improved genetic
counseling by discovering unaffected variant carriers who are at risk of
transmitting their variant and are also exposed to develop cardiac complications 
during adulthood thus prompting long-term cardiac follow-up. This study provides 
an important baseline at dawning of the next-generation sequencing era.

PMCID: PMC4717196 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26014430  [PubMed - in process]


11. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Jul-Sep;10(3):544-8. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.137962.

Identification of human prolactinoma related genes by DNA microarray.

Zhao L, Lin M, Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Fuzhou General Hospital of Nanjing Command, PLA,
Fuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the genes involved in prolactinoma by bioinformatics
methods and provide new potential biomarkers for prolactinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The gene-expression profile data, GSE36314, including 4
prolactinoma samples and 3 controls, was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus 
(GEO) database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using the
limma package in R and were then classified into different functional groups by
COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups) annotation based on BLASTX (Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool). Transcriptional factors (TFs) were screened out by
employing the Transcription Factor (TRANSFAC) database. An interaction network
among DEGs and TFs was constructed by Search Tool for the Retrieval of
Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) software. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) pathway and Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis were then
performed for the genes in this network.
RESULTS: A total of 52 genes were identified as being significantly different
between prolactinomas and normal samples which were classified into 29 COG
functional categories. Three TFs, ZIC3 (Zic family member 3), NGFIC (nerve growth
factor-induced protein C) and SP1 (Specificity Protein 1) were screened out,
which can regulate part of DEGs. Two down-regulated genes, FSHB (follicle
stimulating hormone ß subunit) and LHB (luteinizing hormone ß subunit) were
involved in GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone) signaling pathway.
CONCLUSION: Several DEGs between prolactinoma and normal samples were identified 
in our study and candidate agents such as LHB and FSHB may provide the groundwork
for a targeted therapy approach for prolactinomas.

PMID: 25313736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 4;9(6):e98892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098892. eCollection 
2014.

MicroRNA profiling as tool for in vitro developmental neurotoxicity testing: the 
case of sodium valproate.

Smirnova L(1), Block K(1), Sittka A(1), Oelgeschläger M(1), Seiler AE(1), Luch
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), Berlin, Germany.

Studying chemical disturbances during neural differentiation of murine embryonic 
stem cells (mESCs) has been established as an alternative in vitro testing
approach for the identification of developmental neurotoxicants. miRNAs represent
a class of small non-coding RNA molecules involved in the regulation of neural
development and ESC differentiation and specification. Thus, neural
differentiation of mESCs in vitro allows investigating the role of miRNAs in
chemical-mediated developmental toxicity. We analyzed changes in miRNome and
transcriptome during neural differentiation of mESCs exposed to the developmental
neurotoxicant sodium valproate (VPA). A total of 110 miRNAs and 377 mRNAs were
identified differently expressed in neurally differentiating mESCs upon VPA
treatment. Based on miRNA profiling we observed that VPA shifts the lineage
specification from neural to myogenic differentiation (upregulation of
muscle-abundant miRNAs, mir-206, mir-133a and mir-10a, and downregulation of
neural-specific mir-124a, mir-128 and mir-137). These findings were confirmed on 
the mRNA level and via immunochemistry. Particularly, the expression of myogenic 
regulatory factors (MRFs) as well as muscle-specific genes (Actc1, calponin,
myosin light chain, asporin, decorin) were found elevated, while genes involved
in neurogenesis (e.g. Otx1, 2, and Zic3, 4, 5) were repressed. These results were
specific for valproate treatment and--based on the following two
observations--most likely due to the inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activity: (i) we did not observe any induction of muscle-specific miRNAs in
neurally differentiating mESCs exposed to the unrelated developmental
neurotoxicant sodium arsenite; and (ii) the expression of muscle-abundant mir-206
and mir-10a was similarly increased in cells exposed to the structurally
different HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). Based on our results we conclude
that miRNA expression profiling is a suitable molecular endpoint for
developmental neurotoxicity. The observed lineage shift into myogenesis, where
miRNAs may play an important role, could be one of the developmental neurotoxic
mechanisms of VPA.

PMCID: PMC4045889
PMID: 24896083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Thorac Dis. 2014 May;6(5):491-6. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2014.03.26.

Analysis of mutations in 7 candidate genes for dextro-Transposition of the great 
arteries in Chinese population.

Lei L(1), Lin H(1), Zhong S(1), Zhang Z(1), Chen J(1), Li XX(1), Yu X(1), Liu
X(1), Zhuang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardiovascular Surgery of Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute, 
Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou
510080, China ; 2 Department of Hepatobiliary Pancreatic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen
Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China ; 3 Medical
Research Center of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China ; 4 Department of Pediatrics of Guangdong
Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China.

BACKGROUND: Transposition of great arteries (TGA) represents the most frequent
cyanotic heart defect diagnosed in the neonatal period. Several genes had been
identified to be associated with the pathogenesis of dextro-transposition of the 
great arteries (d-TGA). These genes are located in different chromosomes and
their mutations can only explain few clinical cases. Besides, no genetic scan for
TGA has been implemented in China.
METHODS: To evaluate whether aberrations in any of the 13 reported mutations in
seven genes (MED13L, ZIC3, CFC1, NODAL, FOXH1, GDF1 and NKX2-5) could completely 
or in part be the genetic component involved in TGA in Chinese population, we
screened 102 Chinese patients with d-TGA by direct sequencing for mutations
within the seven genes.
RESULTS: We found none of the reported 13 mutations in those 102 Chinese d-TGA
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These reported 13 mutations may not be a common cause of d-TGA in
Chinese population due to racial variation and genetic heterogeneity of TGA. New 
approaches including the whole exome sequencing technology are required to
effectively identify genetic variants in TGA patients in China.

PMCID: PMC4015019
PMID: 24822108  [PubMed]


14. Int J Genomics. 2014;2014:165175. doi: 10.1155/2014/165175. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Expression data analysis to identify biomarkers associated with asthma in
children.

Xu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Rizhao City People's Hospital, No. 126 Donggang
Area, Tai'an Road, Rizhao City, Shandong 276800, China.

Asthma is characterized by recurrent episodes of wheezing, shortness of breath,
chest tightness, and coughing. It is usually caused by a combination of complex
and incompletely understood environmental and genetic interactions. We obtained
gene expression data with high-throughput screening and identified biomarkers of 
children's asthma using bioinformatics tools. Next, we explained the pathogenesis
of children's asthma from the perspective of gene regulatory networks: DAVID was 
applied to perform Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway
enriching analysis for the top 3000 pairs of relationships in differentially
regulatory network. Finally, we found that HAND1, PTK1, NFKB1, ZIC3, STAT6, E2F1,
PELP1, USF2, and CBFB may play important roles in children's asthma initiation.
On account of regulatory impact factor (RIF) score, HAND1, PTK7, and ZIC3 were
the potential asthma-related factors. Our study provided some foundations of a
strategy for biomarker discovery despite a poor understanding of the mechanisms
underlying children's asthma.

PMCID: PMC3985200
PMID: 24790987  [PubMed]


15. Front Pediatr. 2013 Jun 6;1:11. doi: 10.3389/fped.2013.00011.

Transposition of great arteries: new insights into the pathogenesis.

Unolt M(1), Putotto C(1), Silvestri LM(1), Marino D(1), Scarabotti A(1), Valerio 
Massaccesi(1), Caiaro A(1), Versacci P(1), Marino B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, "Sapienza" University of Rome , Rome , Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, "Sapienza" University of Rome , Rome , Italy ;
Eleonora Lorillard Spencer Cenci Foundation , Rome , Italy.

Transposition of great arteries (TGA) is one of the most common and severe
congenital heart diseases (CHD). It is also one of the most mysterious CHD
because it has no precedent in phylogenetic and ontogenetic development, it does 
not represent an alternative physiological model of blood circulation and its
etiology and morphogenesis are still largely unknown. However, recent
epidemiologic, experimental, and genetic data suggest new insights into the
pathogenesis. TGA is very rarely associated with the most frequent genetic
syndromes, such as Turner, Noonan, Williams or Marfan syndromes, and in Down
syndrome, it is virtually absent. The only genetic syndrome with a strong
relation with TGA is Heterotaxy. In lateralization defects TGA is frequently
associated with asplenia syndrome. Moreover, TGA is rather frequent in cases of
isolated dextrocardia with situs solitus, showing link with defect of visceral
situs. Nowadays, the most reliable method to induce TGA consists in treating
pregnant mice with retinoic acid or with retinoic acid inhibitors. Following such
treatment not only cases of TGA with d-ventricular loop have been registered, but
also some cases of congenitally corrected transposition of great arteries
(CCTGA). In another experiment, the embryos of mice treated with retinoic acid in
day 6.5 presented Heterotaxy, suggesting a relationship among these
morphologically different CHD. In humans, some families, beside TGA cases,
present first-degree relatives with CCTGA. This data suggest that monogenic
inheritance with a variable phenotypic expression could explain the familial
aggregation of TGA and CCTGA. In some of these families we previously found
multiple mutations in laterality genes including Nodal and ZIC3, confirming a
pathogenetic relation between TGA and Heterotaxy. These overall data suggest to
include TGA in the pathogenetic group of laterality defects instead of
conotruncal abnormalities due to ectomesenchymal tissue migration.

PMCID: PMC3860888
PMID: 24400257  [PubMed]


16. PLoS Genet. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003852. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003852. Epub 2013
Oct 31.

Genome wide analysis reveals Zic3 interaction with distal regulatory elements of 
stage specific developmental genes in zebrafish.

Winata CL(1), Kondrychyn I, Kumar V, Srinivasan KG, Orlov Y, Ravishankar A,
Prabhakar S, Stanton LW, Korzh V, Mathavan S.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Zic3 regulates early embryonic patterning in vertebrates. Loss of Zic3 function
is known to disrupt gastrulation, left-right patterning, and neurogenesis.
However, molecular events downstream of this transcription factor are poorly
characterized. Here we use the zebrafish as a model to study the developmental
role of Zic3 in vivo, by applying a combination of two powerful genomics
approaches--ChIP-seq and microarray. Besides confirming direct regulation of
previously implicated Zic3 targets of the Nodal and canonical Wnt pathways,
analysis of gastrula stage embryos uncovered a number of novel candidate target
genes, among which were members of the non-canonical Wnt pathway and the neural
pre-pattern genes. A similar analysis in zic3-expressing cells obtained by FACS
at segmentation stage revealed a dramatic shift in Zic3 binding site locations
and identified an entirely distinct set of target genes associated with later
developmental functions such as neural development. We demonstrate cis-regulation
of several of these target genes by Zic3 using in vivo enhancer assay. Analysis
of Zic3 binding sites revealed a distribution biased towards distal intergenic
regions, indicative of a long distance regulatory mechanism; some of these
binding sites are highly conserved during evolution and act as functional
enhancers. This demonstrated that Zic3 regulation of developmental genes is
achieved predominantly through long distance regulatory mechanism and revealed
that developmental transitions could be accompanied by dramatic changes in
regulatory landscape.

PMCID: PMC3814314
PMID: 24204288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Hum Mutat. 2014 Jan;35(1):66-75.

Genetic and functional analyses of ZIC3 variants in congenital heart disease.

Cowan J, Tariq M, Ware SM.

Mutations in zinc-finger in cerebellum 3 (ZIC3) result in heterotaxy or isolated 
congenital heart disease (CHD). The majority of reported mutations cluster in
zinc-finger domains. We previously demonstrated that many of these lead to
aberrant ZIC3 subcellular trafficking. A relative paucity of N- and C-terminal
mutations has, however, prevented similar analyses in these regions. Notably, an 
N-terminal polyalanine expansion was recently identified in a patient with
VACTERL, suggesting a potentially distinct function for this domain. Here we
report ZIC3 sequencing results from 440 unrelated patients with heterotaxy and
CHD, the largest cohort yet examined. Variants were identified in 5.2% of
sporadic male cases. This rate exceeds previous estimates of 1% and has important
clinical implications for genetic testing and risk-based counseling. Eight of 11 
were novel, including 5 N-terminal variants. Subsequent functional analyses
included four additional reported but untested variants. Aberrant cytoplasmic
localization and decreased luciferase transactivation were observed for all
zinc-finger variants, but not for downstream or in-frame upstream variants,
including both analyzed polyalanine expansions. Collectively, these results
expand the ZIC3 mutational spectrum, support a higher than expected prevalence in
sporadic cases, and suggest alternative functions for terminal mutations,
highlighting a need for further study of these domains.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC3946352
PMID: 24123890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Pediatr Res. 2013 Nov;74(5):494-502. doi: 10.1038/pr.2013.147. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Heterotaxy-spectrum heart defects in Zic3 hypomorphic mice.

Haaning AM(1), Quinn ME, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in Zinc Finger Protein of the Cerebellum 3 (ZIC3) cause
X-linked heterotaxy and isolated cardiovascular malformations. Recent data
suggest a potential cell-autonomous role for Zic3 in myocardium via regulation of
Nppa and Tbx5. We sought to develop a hypomorphic Zic3 mouse to model human
heterotaxy and investigate developmental mechanisms underlying variability in
cardiac phenotypes.
METHODS: Zic3 hypomorphic mice were created by targeted insertion of a neomycin
cassette and investigated by gross, histologic, and molecular methods.
RESULTS: Low-level Zic3 expression is sufficient for partial rescue of viability 
as compared with Zic3 null mice. Concordance of early left-right molecular marker
abnormalities and later anatomic abnormalities suggests that the primary effect
of Zic3 in heart development occurs during left-right patterning.
Cardiac-specific gene expression of Nppa (atrial natriuretic factor) and Tbx5
marked the proper morphological locations in the heart regardless of looping
abnormalities.
CONCLUSION: Zic3 hypomorphic mice are useful models to investigate the variable
cardiac defects resulting from a single genetic defect. Low-level Zic3 expression
rescues the left pulmonary isomerism identified in Zic3 null embryos. Our data do
not support a direct role for Zic3 in the myocardium via regulation of Nppa and
Tbx5 and suggest that the primary effect of Zic3 on cardiac development occurs
during left-right patterning.

PMCID: PMC4176930
PMID: 23999067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):2725-33. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.07.009. Epub 2013 Jul 19.

Sumoylation regulates nuclear localization and function of zinc finger
transcription factor ZIC3.

Chen L(1), Ma Y, Qian L, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Stem Cell Engineering, Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX
77030, USA; Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston,
Houston, TX 77204, USA.

ZIC3, an X-linked zinc finger transcription factor, was the first identified gene
involved in establishing normal left-right patterning in humans. Mutations in the
Zic3 gene in patients cause heterotaxy, which includes congenital heart defects. 
However, very little is known about how the function of the ZIC3 protein is
regulated. Sumoylation is a posttranslational modification process in which a
group of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) proteins is covalently attached to 
targets via a series of enzymatic reactions. Here, we report for the first time
that sumoylation targets human ZIC3 primarily on the consensus lysine residue
K248, which is critical for the nuclear retention of ZIC3. Consequently, SUMO
modification potentiates the repressive activity of ZIC3 on the promoter of its
target gene cardiac a-actin, and the mutation of lysine 248 to arginine (K248R)
abolishes its repressive function. We further revealed that ZIC3 variants with
mutations found in human patients with congenital anomalies exhibit aberrant
sumoylation activity, which at least partially accounts for their cytoplasmic
diffusion. Improved sumoylation of human disease-associated ZIC3 variants
reestablishes their nuclear occupancy in the presence of SUMO E3 ligase and
SUMO-1. Thus, the altered sumoylation status of ZIC3 underpins the developmental 
abnormalities associated with these ZIC3 mutants. The SUMO targeting consensus
sequence in ZIC3 is highly conserved in its paralogs and orthologs, pointing to
sumoylation as a general mechanism underlying the functional control of ZIC
proteins. This study provides a potential therapeutic strategy to regain the
normal subcellular distribution and function of ZIC3 mutants by restoring SUMO
conjugation.

© 2013.

PMID: 23872418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e61845. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061845. Print 2013.

Conserved structural domains in FoxD4L1, a neural forkhead box transcription
factor, are required to repress or activate target genes.

Klein SL(1), Neilson KM, Orban J, Yaklichkin S, Hoffbauer J, Mood K, Daar IO,
Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, George Washington University
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(4). doi:
10.1371/annotation/b1f1b311-f2ec-4c09-870f-5771fcbdc3ed.

FoxD4L1 is a forkhead transcription factor that expands the neural ectoderm by
down-regulating genes that promote the onset of neural differentiation and
up-regulating genes that maintain proliferative neural precursors in an immature 
state. We previously demonstrated that binding of Grg4 to an Eh-1 motif enhances 
the ability of FoxD4L1 to down-regulate target neural genes but does not account 
for all of its repressive activity. Herein we analyzed the protein sequence for
additional interaction motifs and secondary structure. Eight conserved motifs
were identified in the C-terminal region of fish and frog proteins. Extending the
analysis to mammals identified a high scoring motif downstream of the Eh-1 domain
that contains a tryptophan residue implicated in protein-protein interactions. In
addition, secondary structure prediction programs predicted an a-helical
structure overlapping with amphibian-specific Motif 6 in Xenopus, and similarly
located a-helical structures in other vertebrate FoxD proteins. We tested
functionality of this site by inducing a glutamine-to-proline substitution
expected to break the predicted a-helical structure; this significantly reduced
FoxD4L1's ability to repress zic3 and irx1. Because this mutation does not
interfere with Grg4 binding, these results demonstrate that at least two regions,
the Eh-1 motif and a more C-terminal predicted a-helical/Motif 6 site, additively
contribute to repression. In the N-terminal region we previously identified a 14 
amino acid motif that is required for the up-regulation of target genes.
Secondary structure prediction programs predicted a short ß-strand separating two
acidic domains. Mutant constructs show that the ß-strand itself is not required
for transcriptional activation. Instead, activation depends upon a glycine
residue that is predicted to provide sufficient flexibility to bring the two
acidic domains into close proximity. These results identify conserved predicted
motifs with secondary structures that enable FoxD4L1 to carry out its essential
functions as both a transcriptional repressor and activator of neural genes.

PMCID: PMC3627651
PMID: 23610594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Dyn. 2013 Jul;242(7):897-908. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23978. Epub 2013 May 30.

Spatiotemporal expression of Zic genes during vertebrate inner ear development.

Chervenak AP(1), Hakim IS, Barald KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inner ear development involves signaling from surrounding tissues,
including the adjacent hindbrain, periotic mesenchyme, and notochord. These
signals include SHH, FGFs, BMPs, and WNTs from the hindbrain and SHH from the
notochord. Zic genes, which are expressed in the dorsal neural tube and act
during neural development, have been implicated as effectors of these pathways.
This report examines whether Zic genes' involvement in inner ear development is a
tenable hypothesis based on their expression patterns.
RESULTS: In the developing inner ear of both the chick and mouse, all of the Zic 
genes were expressed in the dorsal neural tube and variably in the periotic
mesenchyme, but expression of the Zic genes in the otic epithelium was not found.
The onset of expression differed among the Zic genes; within any given region
surrounding the otic epithelium, multiple Zic genes were expressed in the same
place at the same time.
CONCLUSIONS: Zic gene expression in the region of the developing inner ear is
similar between mouse and chick. Zic expression domains overlap with sites of WNT
and SHH signaling during otocyst patterning, suggesting a role for Zic genes in
modulating signaling from these pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3771324
PMID: 23606270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dis Model Mech. 2013 May;6(3):755-67. doi: 10.1242/dmm.011668. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

A murine Zic3 transcript with a premature termination codon evades
nonsense-mediated decay during axis formation.

Ahmed JN(1), Ali RG, Warr N, Wilson HM, Bellchambers HM, Barratt KS, Thompson AJ,
Arkell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Early Mammalian Development Laboratory, Research School of Biology, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia.

The ZIC transcription factors are key mediators of embryonic development and ZIC3
is the gene most commonly associated with situs defects (heterotaxy) in humans.
Half of patient ZIC3 mutations introduce a premature termination codon (PTC). In 
vivo, PTC-containing transcripts might be targeted for nonsense-mediated decay
(NMD). NMD efficiency is known to vary greatly between transcripts, tissues and
individuals and it is possible that differences in survival of PTC-containing
transcripts partially explain the striking phenotypic variability that
characterizes ZIC3-associated congenital defects. For example, the PTC-containing
transcripts might encode a C-terminally truncated protein that retains partial
function or that dominantly interferes with other ZIC family members. Here we
describe the katun (Ka) mouse mutant, which harbours a mutation in the Zic3 gene 
that results in a PTC. At the time of axis formation there is no discernible
decrease in this PTC-containing transcript in vivo, indicating that the mammalian
Zic3 transcript is relatively insensitive to NMD, prompting the need to
re-examine the molecular function of the truncated proteins predicted from human 
studies and to determine whether the N-terminal portion of ZIC3 possesses
dominant-negative capabilities. A combination of in vitro studies and analysis of
the Ka phenotype indicate that it is a null allele of Zic3 and that the
N-terminal portion of ZIC3 does not encode a dominant-negative molecule.
Heterotaxy in patients with PTC-containing ZIC3 transcripts probably arises due
to loss of ZIC3 function alone.

PMCID: PMC3634658
PMID: 23471918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Oct;70(20):3791-811. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1285-5. Epub
2013 Feb 27.

The ZIC gene family encodes multi-functional proteins essential for patterning
and morphogenesis.

Houtmeyers R(1), Souopgui J, Tejpar S, Arkell R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, O&N1, 3000, Leuven,
Belgium, rob.houtmeyers@med.kuleuven.be.

The zinc finger of the cerebellum gene (ZIC) discovered in Drosophila
melanogaster (odd-paired) has five homologs in Xenopus, chicken, mice, and
humans, and seven in zebrafish. This pattern of gene copy expansion is
accompanied by a divergence in gene and protein structure, suggesting that Zic
family members share some, but not all, functions. ZIC genes are implicated in
neuroectodermal development and neural crest cell induction. All share conserved 
regions encoding zinc finger domains, however their heterogeneity and
specification remain unexplained. In this review, the evolution, structure, and
expression patterns of the ZIC homologs are described; specific functions
attributable to individual family members are supported. A review of data from
functional studies in Xenopus and murine models suggest that ZIC genes encode
multifunctional proteins operating in a context-specific manner to drive critical
events during embryogenesis. The identification of ZIC mutations in congenital
syndromes highlights the relevance of these genes in human development.

PMID: 23443491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Apr;161A(4):792-802. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35849. Epub 2013 
Feb 20.

The phenotypic spectrum of ZIC3 mutations includes isolated d-transposition of
the great arteries and double outlet right ventricle.

D'Alessandro LC(1), Latney BC, Paluru PC, Goldmuntz E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2014 May;164A(5):1340.

Disease causing mutations for heterotaxy syndrome were first identified in the
X-linked laterality gene, ZIC3. Mutations typically result in males with situs
ambiguus and complex congenital heart disease; however affected females and one
male with isolated d-transposition of the great arteries (d-TGA) have been
reported. We hypothesized that a subset of patients with heart defects common to 
heterotaxy but without laterality defects would have ZIC3 mutations. We also
sought to estimate the prevalence of ZIC3 mutations in sporadic heterotaxy.
Patients with TGA (n = 169), double outlet right ventricle (DORV; n = 89), common
atrioventricular canal (CAVC; n = 41), and heterotaxy (n = 54) underwent
sequencing of ZIC3 exons. We tested 90 patients with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) to
correlate genotype with phenotype. Three potentially disease-related missense
mutations were detected: c.49G > T (Gly17Cys) in a female with isolated DORV,
c.98C > T (Ala33Val) in a male with isolated d-TGA, and c.841C > T (His281Tyr) in
a female with sporadic heterotaxy. We also identified a novel insertion
(CPFP333ins) in a family with heterotaxy. All were absent in 200 control patients
and the 1000 Genomes Project (n = 629). No significant mutations were found in
patients with TOF. Functional studies demonstrated reduced transcriptional
activity of the ZIC3 His281Tyr mutant protein. ZIC3 mutations were rarely
identified in isolated DORV and d-TGA suggesting that a subset of DORV and d-TGA 
may fall within the spectrum of laterality defects. ZIC3 mutations were found in 
3.7% of patients with sporadic heterotaxy; therefore testing should be considered
in patients with heterotaxy.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3707401
PMID: 23427188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jul 15;22(14):2017-25. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0651. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

Zic3 enhances the generation of mouse induced pluripotent stem cells.

Declercq J(1), Sheshadri P, Verfaillie CM, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute , KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Zinc finger protein of the cerebellum (Zic)3, a member of Gli family of
transcription factors (TFs), is essential for maintaining pluripotency of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and has been reported to activate TF Nanog in an
Oct4/Sox2-independent manner. Previously, we showed that Zic3 (Z), in combination
with the Yamanka factors OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4 (OSK), induces neural
progenitor-like cells from human fibroblasts. However, a similar combination of
TFs (OSKZ) transduced in mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in enhanced induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) formation compared with OSK alone, but not
neuroprogenitors. OSKZ-derived iPSCs are indistinguishable from mESCs in colony
morphology, expression of alkaline phosphatase and pluripotency genes, and
embryoid body and teratoma formation. Zic3 activates the transcription of Nanog, 
a key pluripotency regulator, as evidenced by a luciferase promoter assay. During
the course of iPSC derivation, Zic3-mediated enhanced expression of Nanog and
Tbx3, gene known to enhance iPSCs derivation, is observed. Not only does Zic3
enhance the reprogramming efficiency, but also reactivation of the endogenous
Zic3 protein is essential for the generation of iPSCs, as knockdown of Zic3
during the iPSC generation with OSKM significantly reduced the number of
colonies. Together, our result uncovers an important role of Zic3 in generating
mouse iPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3700107
PMID: 23421367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 May 15;22(10):1913-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt001. Epub 2013 Jan
8.

Zic3 is required in the migrating primitive streak for node morphogenesis and
left-right patterning.

Sutherland MJ(1), Wang S, Quinn ME, Haaning A, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH,
USA.

In humans, loss-of-function mutations in ZIC3 cause isolated cardiovascular
malformations and X-linked heterotaxy, a disorder with abnormal left-right
asymmetry of organs. Zic3 null mice recapitulate the human heterotaxy phenotype
but also have early gastrulation defects, axial patterning defects and neural
tube defects complicating an assessment of the role of Zic3 in cardiac
development. Zic3 is expressed ubiquitously during critical stages of left-right 
patterning but its later expression in the developing heart remains controversial
and the molecular mechanism(s) by which it causes heterotaxy are unknown. To
define the temporal and spatial requirements, for Zic3 in left-right patterning, 
we generated conditional Zic3 mice and Zic3-LacZ-BAC reporter mice. The latter
provide compelling evidence that Zic3 is expressed in the mouse node and absent
in the heart. Conditional deletion using T-Cre identifies a requirement for Zic3 
in the primitive streak and migrating mesoderm for proper left-right patterning
and cardiac development. In contrast, Zic3 is not required in heart progenitors
or the cardiac compartment. In addition, the data demonstrate abnormal node
morphogenesis in Zic3 null mice and identify similar node dysplasia when Zic3 was
specifically deleted from the migrating mesoderm and primitive streak. These
results define the temporal and spatial requirements for Zic3 in node
morphogenesis, left-right patterning and cardiac development and suggest the
possibility that a requirement for Zic3 in node ultrastructure underlies its role
in heterotaxy and laterality disorders.

PMCID: PMC3633368
PMID: 23303524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Mar 1;22(5):879-89. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds494. Epub 2012 Nov
25.

Zic3 is required in the extra-cardiac perinodal region of the lateral plate
mesoderm for left-right patterning and heart development.

Jiang Z(1), Zhu L, Hu L, Slesnick TC, Pautler RG, Justice MJ, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Texas Childrens Hospital, Baylor 
College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mutations in ZIC3 cause human X-linked heterotaxy and isolated cardiovascular
malformations. A mouse model with targeted deletion of Zic3 demonstrates an early
role for Zic3 in gastrulation, CNS, cardiac and left-right axial development. The
observation of multiple malformations in Zic3(null) mice and the relatively broad
expression pattern of Zic3 suggest its important roles in multiple developmental 
processes. Here, we report that Zic3 is primarily required in epiblast
derivatives to affect left-right patterning and its expression in epiblast is
necessary for proper transcriptional control of embryonic cardiac development.
However, cardiac malformations in Zic3 deficiency occur not because Zic3 is
intrinsically required in the heart but rather because it functions early in the 
establishment of left-right body axis. In addition, we provide evidence
supporting a role for Zic3 specifically in the perinodal region of the posterior 
lateral plate mesoderm for the establishment of laterality. These data delineate 
the spatial requirement of Zic3 during left-right patterning in the mammalian
embryo, and provide basis for further understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying the complex interaction of Zic3 with signaling pathways involved in
the early establishment of laterality.

PMCID: PMC3606008
PMID: 23184148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Development. 2012 Nov;139(22):4220-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.081497. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

BMP, Wnt and FGF signals are integrated through evolutionarily conserved
enhancers to achieve robust expression of Pax3 and Zic genes at the zebrafish
neural plate border.

Garnett AT(1), Square TA, Medeiros DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309-0334, USA.

Neural crest cells generate a range of cells and tissues in the vertebrate head
and trunk, including peripheral neurons, pigment cells, and cartilage. Neural
crest cells arise from the edges of the nascent central nervous system, a domain 
called the neural plate border (NPB). NPB induction is known to involve the BMP, 
Wnt and FGF signaling pathways. However, little is known about how these signals 
are integrated to achieve temporally and spatially specific expression of genes
in NPB cells. Furthermore, the timing and relative importance of these signals in
NPB formation appears to differ between vertebrate species. Here, we use
heat-shock overexpression and chemical inhibitors to determine whether, and when,
BMP, Wnt and FGF signaling are needed for expression of the NPB specifiers pax3a 
and zic3 in zebrafish. We then identify four evolutionarily conserved enhancers
from the pax3a and zic3 loci and test their response to BMP, Wnt and FGF
perturbations. We find that all three signaling pathways are required during
gastrulation for the proper expression of pax3a and zic3 in the zebrafish NPB. We
also find that, although the expression patterns driven by the pax3a and zic3
enhancers largely overlap, they respond to different combinations of BMP, Wnt and
FGF signals. Finally, we show that the combination of the two pax3a enhancers is 
less susceptible to signaling perturbations than either enhancer alone. Taken
together, our results reveal how BMPs, FGFs and Wnts act cooperatively and
redundantly through partially redundant enhancers to achieve robust, specific
gene expression in the zebrafish NPB.

PMCID: PMC4074300
PMID: 23034628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 May;28(3):193-8.

[Experimental research on DNA methylation profile in congenital microtia].

[Article in Chinese]

Song YP(1), Lin L, Pan B, Yang QH, Han J, Jiang HY, Zhuang HX.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100144, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen for abnormal methylation in CpG islands and CpG sites
through whole genome of congenital microtia to identify their associated genes.
To discuss the relationship between abnormal methylation level of genes and the
etiology of congenital microtia.
METHODS: Residual ear cartilage of 50 patients with microtia was collected with
ear cartilage of 34 patients without ear malformations as control. Nimblegen CpG 
promoter array was chosen to screen the 28,226 CpG islands in the whole genome of
both experimental and control groups. The genes with differential methylated CpG 
islands were selected. SpectroCHIP array was chosen to detect the methylation
level of each CpG site in abnormal methyletion CpG islands of both experimental
and control groups. The CpG sites with differential methylation level were
selected.
RESULTS: There were 36 CpG islands with differential methylated level in whole
genome between experimental group and control group, among which 29 CpG islands
were connected with 29 named genes. In the abnormal methylated CpG islands of
COL18A1, MYH14, RBMY1A1 and ZIC3, 6 differentially methylated CpG sites were
found with statistical significance. The methylation level of these 6 CpG sites
in experimental group and control group were COL18A1_2_CpG_170.9783 +/- 0.0235
and 0.9526 +/- 0.0589; MYH14_CpG_170.9600 +/- 0.0414 and 0.9284 +/- 0.0655;
RBMY1A1_1_CpG_3.40.9966 +/- 0.0055 and 0.9914 +/- 0.0069; RBMY1A1_1_CpG_130.9648 
+/- 0.0118 and 0.9757 +/- 0.0127; ZIC3_3_CpG_150.0867 +/- 0.0212 and 0.0543 +/-
0.0399; ZIC3_2_CpG_270.3775 +/- 0.1816 and 0.472 3 +/- 0.0439.
CONCLUSIONS: The DNA methylation profile of the entire genome is initially
established. The abnormal methylated CpG islands of COL18A1, MYH14, RBMY1A1 and
ZIC3 might be related to the pathogenesis of microtia.

PMID: 22870707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;4(4):252-5. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjs015. Epub 2012 Apr 15.

Zic3 induces conversion of human fibroblasts to stable neural progenitor-like
cells.

Kumar A, Declercq J, Eggermont K, Agirre X, Prosper F, Verfaillie CM.

PMID: 22508949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Physiol Genomics. 2012 May 1;44(9):518-41. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00013.2012. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Human gene copy number spectra analysis in congenital heart malformations.

Tomita-Mitchell A(1), Mahnke DK, Struble CA, Tuffnell ME, Stamm KD, Hidestrand M,
Harris SE, Goetsch MA, Simpson PM, Bick DP, Broeckel U, Pelech AN, Tweddell JS,
Mitchell ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. amitchell@mcw.edu

The clinical significance of copy number variants (CNVs) in congenital heart
disease (CHD) continues to be a challenge. Although CNVs including genes can
confer disease risk, relationships between gene dosage and phenotype are still
being defined. Our goal was to perform a quantitative analysis of CNVs involving 
100 well-defined CHD risk genes identified through previously published human
association studies in subjects with anatomically defined cardiac malformations. 
A novel analytical approach permitting CNV gene frequency "spectra" to be
computed over prespecified regions to determine phenotype-gene dosage
relationships was employed. CNVs in subjects with CHD (n = 945), subphenotyped
into 40 groups and verified in accordance with the European Paediatric Cardiac
Code, were compared with two control groups, a disease-free cohort (n = 2,026)
and a population with coronary artery disease (n = 880). Gains (=200 kb) and
losses (=100 kb) were determined over 100 CHD risk genes and compared using a
Barnard exact test. Six subphenotypes showed significant enrichment (P = 0.05),
including aortic stenosis (valvar), atrioventricular canal (partial),
atrioventricular septal defect with tetralogy of Fallot, subaortic stenosis,
tetralogy of Fallot, and truncus arteriosus. Furthermore, CNV gene frequency
spectra were enriched (P = 0.05) for losses at: FKBP6, ELN, GTF2IRD1, GATA4,
CRKL, TBX1, ATRX, GPC3, BCOR, ZIC3, FLNA and MID1; and gains at: PRKAB2, FMO5,
CHD1L, BCL9, ACP6, GJA5, HRAS, GATA6 and RUNX1. Of CHD subjects, 14% had causal
chromosomal abnormalities, and 4.3% had likely causal (significantly enriched),
large, rare CNVs. CNV frequency spectra combined with precision phenotyping may
lead to increased molecular understanding of etiologic pathways.

PMCID: PMC3426426
PMID: 22318994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Biol. 2012 Apr 1;364(1):22-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.01.011. Epub 2012
Jan 21.

An essential and highly conserved role for Zic3 in left-right patterning,
gastrulation and convergent extension morphogenesis.

Cast AE(1), Gao C, Amack JD, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, the Heart Institute, Department 
of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 240 Albert Sabin
Way, MLC 7020, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Mutations in ZIC3 result in X-linked heterotaxy in humans, a syndrome consisting 
of left-right (L-R) patterning defects, midline abnormalities, and cardiac
malformations. Similarly, loss of function of Zic3 in mouse results in abnormal
L-R patterning and cardiac development. However, Zic3 null mice also exhibit
defects in gastrulation, neural tube closure, and axial patterning, suggesting
the hypothesis that Zic3 is necessary for proper convergent extension (C-E)
morphogenesis. To further investigate the role of Zic3 in early embryonic
development, we utilized two model systems, Xenopus laevis and zebrafish, and
performed loss of function analysis using antisense morpholino-mediated gene
knockdown. Both Xenopus and zebrafish demonstrated significant impairment of C-E 
in Zic3 morphants. L-R patterning was also disrupted, indicating that the role of
Zic3 in L-R axis development is conserved across species. Correlation of L-R
patterning and C-E defects in Xenopus suggests that early C-E defects may
underlie L-R patterning defects at later stages, since Zic3 morphants with
moderate to severe C-E defects exhibited an increase in laterality defects. Taken
together, these results demonstrate a functional conservation of Zic3 in L-R
patterning and uncover a previously unrecognized role for Zic3 in C-E
morphogenesis during early vertebrate development.

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3294024
PMID: 22285814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 15;21(8):1888-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds002. Epub 2012 Jan 
10.

Preaxial polydactyly caused by Gli3 haploinsufficiency is rescued by Zic3 loss of
function in mice.

Quinn ME(1), Haaning A, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA.

Limb anomalies are important birth defects that are incompletely understood
genetically and mechanistically. GLI3, a mediator of hedgehog signaling, is a
genetic cause of limb malformations including pre- and postaxial polydactyly,
Pallister-Hall syndrome and Greig cephalopolysyndactyly. A closely related Gli
(glioma-associated oncogene homolog)-superfamily member, ZIC3, causes X-linked
heterotaxy syndrome in humans but has not been investigated in limb development. 
During limb development, post-translational processing of Gli3 from activator to 
repressor antagonizes and posteriorly restricts Sonic hedgehog (Shh). We
demonstrate that Zic3 and Gli3 expression overlap in developing limbs and that
Zic3 converts Gli3 from repressor to activator in vitro. In Gli3 mutant mice,
Zic3 loss of function abrogates ectopic Shh expression in anterior limb buds,
limits overexpression in the zone of polarizing activity and normalizes aberrant 
Gli3 repressor/Gli3 activator ratios observed in Gli3+/- embryos. Zic3
null;Gli3+/- neonates show rescue of the polydactylous phenotype seen in Gli3+/- 
animals. These studies identify a previously unrecognized role for Zic3 in
regulating limb digit number via its modifying effect on Gli3 and Shh expression 
levels. Together, these results indicate that two Gli superfamily members that
cause disparate human congenital malformation syndromes interact genetically and 
demonstrate the importance of Zic3 in regulating Shh pathway in developing limbs.

PMCID: PMC3313802
PMID: 22234993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Congenit Heart Dis. 2013 Mar-Apr;8(2):E36-40. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2011.00602.x. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Situs inversus totalis and a novel ZIC3 mutation in a family with X-linked
heterotaxy.

D'Alessandro LC(1), Casey B, Siu VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
dalessandrol@email.chop.edu

Disorders of laterality consist of a complex set of malformations resulting from 
failure to establish normal asymmetry along the left-right axis, and include both
heterotaxy and situs inversus totalis. Zinc fingers in cerebellum 3 (ZIC3) was
the first gene to be definitively associated with heterotaxy syndromes in humans 
(OMIM #306955), with 13 mutations previously described in both familial and
sporadic cases. We now report the clinical and molecular characterization of a
five-generation family originally reported in 1974 as having X-linked
dextrocardia. Longitudinal follow-up revealed that this family has X-linked
heterotaxy due to a missense mutation, c.1048A>G(R350G), in the third zinc finger
domain of ZIC3. The pedigree demonstrates the first reported case of situs
inversus totalis associated with a ZIC3 mutation in a male and the second
reported case of incomplete penetrance in an unaffected transmitting male, as
well as a wide range of phenotypes of varying severity. Several affected members 
also exhibit renal and hindgut malformations, consistent with previously reported
secondary features in ZIC3 mutations. The spectrum of features in this family
emphasizes the importance of thorough molecular and imaging studies in both
sporadic and familial cases of heterotaxy to ensure accurate prenatal diagnosis
and recurrence risk counseling.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22171628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):166-73. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34350. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

A patient with a mild holoprosencephaly spectrum phenotype and heterotaxy and a
1.3<U+2009>Mb deletion encompassing GLI2.

Kevelam SH(1), van Harssel JJ, van der Zwaag B, Smeets HJ, Paulussen AD,
Lichtenbelt KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands. s.kevelam@vumc.nl

Loss-of-function mutations of GLI2 are associated with features at the mild end
of the holoprosencephaly spectrum, including abnormal pituitary gland formation
and/or function, and craniofacial abnormalities. In addition patients may have
branchial arch anomalies and polydactyly. Large, microscopically visible,
interstitial deletions spanning 2q14.2 have been reported in patients with
multiple congenital anomalies and intellectual disability. We report here on a
patient with a mild holoprosencephaly spectrum phenotype (bilateral cleft lip and
palate and abnormal pituitary gland formation with panhypopituitarism) and normal
psychomotor development, who was found to carry a 1.3<U+2009>Mb submicroscopic
heterozygous deletion in 2q14.2, encompassing the GLI2 gene. We review the
genotype and phenotype of previously published probands with GLI2 aberrations.
Our findings confirm the association of haploinsufficiency of GLI2 and mild HPE
spectrum features. Consistent with prior reports, we observed incomplete
penetrance of the deletion in the family, illustrating the multifactorial
etiology of holoprosencephaly spectrum features. In addition to the
holoprosencephaly spectrum features, the proband had heterotaxy of the abdominal 
organs. Mutations in the known heterotaxy genes (NODAL, ZIC3 and CFC1) were
excluded. The deletion contains five genes, in addition to GLI2, including the
EPB4.1l5 gene. Based on findings in Epb4.1l5 mutant mice we hypothesize that
Epb4.1l5 is a candidate gene for the heterotaxy observed in the proband.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22106008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):220-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.026. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

Xenopus Zic3 controls notochord and organizer development through suppression of 
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Fujimi TJ(1), Hatayama M, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic3 controls neuroectodermal differentiation and left-right patterning in
Xenopus laevis embryos. Here we demonstrate that Zic3 can suppress Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling and control development of the notochord and Spemann's organizer. When 
we overexpressed Zic3 by injecting its RNA into the dorsal marginal zone of
2-cell-stage embryos, the embryos lost mesodermal dorsal midline structures and
showed reduced expression of organizer markers (Siamois and Goosecoid) and a
notochord marker (Xnot). Co-injection of Siamois RNA partially rescued the
reduction of Xnot expression caused by Zic3 overexpression. Because the
expression of Siamois in the organizer region is controlled by Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling, we subsequently examined the functional interaction between Zic3 and
Wnt signaling. Co-injection of Xenopus Zic RNAs and ß-catenin RNA with a reporter
responsive to the Wnt/ß-catenin cascade indicated that Zic1, Zic2, Zic3, Zic4,
and Zic5 can all suppress ß-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation. In
addition, co-injection of Zic3 RNA inhibited the secondary axis formation caused 
by ventral-side injection of ß-catenin RNA in Xenopus embryos. Zic3-mediated
Wnt/ß-catenin signal suppression required the nuclear localization of Zic3, and
involved the reduction of ß-catenin nuclear transport and enhancement of
ß-catenin degradation. Furthermore, Zic3 co-precipitated with Tcf1 (a ß-catenin
co-factor) and XIC (I-mfa domain containing factor required for dorsoanterior
development). The findings in this report produce a novel system for fine-tuning 
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22056782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 11;415(1):42-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.007. Epub 2011 Oct 15.

The role of Zic family zinc finger transcription factors in the proliferation and
differentiation of retinal progenitor cells.

Watabe Y(1), Baba Y, Nakauchi H, Mizota A, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Members of the Zic family of zinc finger transcription factors play critical
roles in a variety of developmental processes. Using DNA microarray analysis, we 
found that Zics are strongly expressed in SSEA-1-positive early retinal
progenitors in the peripheral region of the mouse retina. Reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction using mRNA from the retina at various developmental
stages showed that Zic1 and Zic2 are expressed in the embryonic retina and then
gradually disappear during retinal development. Zic3 is also expressed in the
embryonic retina; its expression level slightly decreases but it is expressed
until adulthood. We overexpressed Zic1, Zic2, or Zic3 in retinal progenitors at
embryonic day 17.5 and cultured the retina as explants for 2 weeks. The number of
rod photoreceptors was fewer than in the control, but no other cell types showed 
significant differences between control and Zic overexpressing cells. The
proliferation activity of normal retinal progenitors decreased after 5 days in
culture, as observed in normal in vivo developmental processes. However, Zic
expressing retinal cells continued to proliferate at days 5 and 7, suggesting
that Zics sustain the proliferation activities of retinal progenitor cells. Since
the effects of Zic1, 2, and 3 are indistinguishable in terms of differentiation
and proliferation of retinal progenitors, the redundant function of Zics in
retinal development is suggested.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22024047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cardiol Young. 2012 Apr;22(2):194-201. doi: 10.1017/S1047951111001181. Epub 2011 
Aug 25.

Mutations in ZIC3 and ACVR2B are a common cause of heterotaxy and associated
cardiovascular anomalies.

Ma L(1), Selamet Tierney ES, Lee T, Lanzano P, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, United
States of America.

Comment in
    Cardiol Young. 2012 Oct;22(5):615-6.

BACKGROUND: Heterotaxy syndrome is caused by left-right asymmetry disturbances
and is associated with abnormal lateralisation of the abdominal and thoracic
organs. The heart is frequently involved and the severity of the abnormality
usually determines the outcome.
METHODS: We performed a direct sequence analysis of the coding sequence of genes 
including Zinc Finger Protein of the Cerebellum 3, Left-Right Determination
Factor 2, Activin A Receptor Type IIB, and Cryptic in 47 patients with laterality
defects and congenital cardiac disease.
RESULTS: Of the 47 patients, 31 (66%) had atrioventricular septal defects, 34
(72%) had abnormal systemic venous return, 25 (53%) had transposed or malposed
great arteries, and 20 (43%) had pulmonary venous abnormalities. We identified
two novel genetic changes in Zinc Finger Protein of the Cerebellum 3, and these
variants were not present in 100 ethnically matched control samples. One
previously reported missense mutation in Activin A Receptor Type IIB was
identified in two unrelated subjects. The genetic changes identified in this
study are all located in conserved regions and are predicted to affect protein
function in left-right axis formation and cardiovascular development.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in Zinc Finger Protein of the Cerebellum 3 and Activin A
Receptor Type IIB were identified in 4 of the 47 patients with heterotaxy
syndrome for a yield of approximately 8.5%. Our results expand the mutation
spectrum of monogenic heterotaxy syndrome with associated cardiac anomalies and
suggest that there are other causes of heterotaxy yet to be identified.

PMCID: PMC3678527
PMID: 21864452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023755. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Identification of a novel ZIC3 isoform and mutation screening in patients with
heterotaxy and congenital heart disease.

Bedard JE(1), Haaning AM, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of 
America.

Patients with heterotaxy have characteristic cardiovascular malformations,
abnormal arrangement of their visceral organs, and midline patterning defects
that result from abnormal left-right patterning during embryogenesis. Loss of
function of the transcription factor ZIC3 causes X-linked heterotaxy and isolated
congenital heart malformations and represents one of the few known monogenic
causes of congenital heart disease. The birth incidence of heterotaxy-spectrum
malformations is significantly higher in males, but our previous work indicated
that mutations within ZIC3 did not account for the male over-representation.
Therefore, cross species comparative sequence alignment was used to identify a
putative novel fourth exon, and the existence of a novel alternatively spliced
transcript was confirmed by amplification from murine embryonic RNA and
subsequent sequencing. This transcript, termed Zic3-B, encompasses exons 1, 2,
and 4 whereas Zic3-A encompasses exons 1, 2, and 3. The resulting protein
isoforms are 466 and 456 amino acid residues respectively, sharing the first 407 
residues. Importantly, the last two amino acids in the fifth zinc finger DNA
binding domain are altered in the Zic3-B isoform, indicating a potential
functional difference that was further evaluated by expression, subcellular
localization, and transactivation analyses. The temporo-spatial expression
pattern of Zic3-B overlaps with Zic3-A in vivo, and both isoforms are localized
to the nucleus in vitro. Both isoforms can transcriptionally activate a Gli
binding site reporter, but only ZIC3-A synergistically activates upon
co-transfection with Gli3, suggesting that the isoforms are functionally
distinct. Screening 109 familial and sporadic male heterotaxy cases did not
identify pathogenic mutations in the newly identified fourth exon and larger
studies are necessary to establish the importance of the novel isoform in human
disease.

PMCID: PMC3157443
PMID: 21858219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 May;155A(5):1123-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33859. Epub 2011
Apr 4.

From VACTERL-H to heterotaxy: variable expressivity of ZIC3-related disorders.

Chung B(1), Shaffer LG, Keating S, Johnson J, Casey B, Chitayat D.

Author information: 
(1)The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The ZIC3 gene encodes a zinc finger protein which functions as a transcription
factor in early stages of left-right body axis formation. Mutations in this
X-linked gene cause a variety of clinical manifestations including heterotaxy,
complex or isolated heart defect as well as other midline urogenital and hindgut 
malformations. We report a four generation family with X-linked heterotaxy
associated with a deletion of the ZIC3 gene at Xq26.3. The index fetus of our
proband showed classical features of heterotaxy while her maternal uncle and one 
brother had imperforate anus and her other brother had features suggestive of
VACTERL-H without heterotaxy. A 1.4<U+2009>Mb deletion in Xq26.3 including the ZIC3 gene
was found in the fetus. Six females in the family were found to be asymptomatic
carriers. Our report indicates that some of the cases with VACTERL-H syndrome may
be caused by a mutation or deletion of the ZIC3 gene.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21465648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neurochem Res. 2011 Jul;36(7):1286-92. doi: 10.1007/s11064-011-0422-5. Epub 2011 
Feb 19.

Role of BMP, FGF, calcium signaling, and Zic proteins in vertebrate
neuroectodermal differentiation.

Aruga J(1), Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.jp

More than a decade has passed since Zic family zinc finger proteins were
discovered to be transcription factors controlling neuroectodermal
differentiation (neural induction) in Xenopus laevis embryos. Although BMP-signal
blocking has been shown to be a major upregulator of Zic genes in neuroectodermal
differentiation, recent studies have revealed that FGF signaling and
intracellular calcium elevation are also involved in regulating the expression of
Zic genes. Different regulatory mechanisms have been found for the Zic1 and Zic3 
genes, raising the possibility that functional synergism between them partly
accounts for the integration of BMP-signal blocking and FGF signaling in
neuroectodermal differentiation. Furthermore, mammalian Zic1 and Zic3 have been
found to be neural-cell-fate-inducing and pluripotency-maintaining factors,
respectively, leading us to the intriguing question of whether the mechanism
underlying amphibian neuroectodermal differentiation is applicable to mammals.
Comprehensive understanding of the Zic family genes is therefore essential for
the study of the neuroectodermal differentiation and stem cell biology.

PMCID: PMC3111669
PMID: 21336820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 1;351(1):120-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.037. Epub 2011
Jan 4.

A role for Zic1 and Zic2 in Myf5 regulation and somite myogenesis.

Pan H(1), Gustafsson MK, Aruga J, Tiedken JJ, Chen JC, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

Zic genes encode a conserved family of zinc finger proteins with essential
functions in neural development and axial skeletal patterning in the vertebrate
embryo. Zic proteins also function as Gli co-factors in Hedgehog signaling. Here,
we report that Zic genes have a role in Myf5 regulation for epaxial somite
myogenesis in the mouse embryo. In situ hybridization studies show that Zic1, 2, 
and 3 transcripts are expressed in Myf5-expressing epaxial myogenic progenitors
in the dorsal medial dermomyotome of newly forming somites, and
immunohistological studies show that Zic2 protein is co-localized with Myf5 and
Pax3 in the dorsal medial lip of the dermomyotome, but is not expressed in the
forming myotome. In functional reporter assays, Zic1 and Zic2, but not Zic3,
potentiate the transactivation of Gli-dependent Myf5 epaxial somite-specific (ES)
enhancer activity in 3T3 cells, and Zic1 activates endogenous Myf5 expression in 
10T1/2 cells and in presomitic mesoderm explants. Zic2 also co-immunoprecipitates
with Gli2, indicating that Zic2 forms complexes with Gli2 to promote Myf5
expression. Genetic studies show that, although Zic2 and Zic1 are activated
normally in sonic hedgehog(-/-) mutant embryos, Myf5 expression in newly forming 
somites is deficient in both sonic hedgehog(-/-) and in Zic2(kd/kd) mutant mouse 
embryos, providing further evidence that these Zic genes are upstream regulators 
of Hedgehog-mediated Myf5 activation. Myf5 activation in newly forming somites is
delayed in Zic2 mutant embryos until the time of Zic1 activation, and both Zic2
and Myf5 require noggin for their activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3045035
PMID: 21211521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Pediatr Surg Int. 2011 Feb;27(2):205-9. doi: 10.1007/s00383-010-2779-y.

Disruption of GLI3-ZIC3 interaction in the cadmium-induced omphalocele chick
model.

Doi T(1), Puri P, Bannigan J, Thompson J.

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin
12, Ireland.

PURPOSE: Administration of heavy metal cadmium (Cd) after 60-h incubation induces
omphalocele spectrum in the chick embryo. Although previous studies have shown
that the earliest detectable histological changes in the chick Cd model occurs
commencing at 4-h post-treatment (4H). However, the molecular mechanism by which 
Cd acts in the critical period of early embryogenesis still remains unclear.
Zic3, a Gli superfamily transcription factor, is expressed in somites and plays
an important role in vertebrate development, including somitogenesis and thus
ventral body wall formation. Gli3 is also expressed in somites and interacts with
Zic3 physically and functionally. It has been reported that Gli3 homozygous
double mutants display omphalocele. Zic3 mutant mice have also been known to
result in omphalocele phenotype. We designed this study to test the hypothesis
that Gli3 and Zic3 gene expression is downregulated during the critical period of
very early embryogenesis in the Cd-induced omphalocele in the chick model.
METHODS: After 60-h incubation, chick embryos were exposed to either saline or
50 µM cadmium and divided into two groups: control and Cd (n = 24 for each
group). Real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed
to evaluate the relative mRNA expression levels of Gli3 and Zic3 in the
Cd-induced omphalocele chick model. Differences between the two groups at each
time point were analyzed statistically and the significance was accepted at
p < 0.05. Immunohistochemistry was also performed to evaluate the
expression/distribution of those proteins in chick embryo.
RESULTS: The relative mRNA expression level of Gli3 and Zic3 was significantly
decreased in the Cd group at 4H when compared with controls (p < 0.05). However, 
there were no significant differences at the other time points. At 4H,
immunoreactivity of GLI3 and ZIC3 was also markedly decreased in Cd-treated
embryos, whereas strong expression of them was seen in the somite in controls.
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence, for the first time, that Gli3 and Zic3 gene
expression is downregulated during the narrow window of very early embryogenesis 
in Cd chick model. Disruption of Gli3-Zic3 interaction in the critical period for
ventral body wall formation may contribute to omphalocele phenotype in Cd chick
model.

PMID: 21069353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Stem Cells. 2010 Nov;28(11):1961-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.527.

The pluripotency regulator Zic3 is a direct activator of the Nanog promoter in
ESCs.

Lim LS(1), Hong FH, Kunarso G, Stanton LW.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Group, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore.

The transcription factor Zic3 is required for maintenance of ESC pluripotency. By
genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-chip) in ESCs, we have identified
379 direct Zic3 targets, many of which are functionally associated with
pluripotency, cell cycle, proliferation, oncogenesis, and early embryogenesis.
Through a computational analysis of Zic3 target sequences, we have identified a
novel Zic3 consensus binding motif (5'-CC(C)/(T) GCTGGG-3'). ChIP results and in 
vitro DNA binding assays revealed that Zic3 binds with high affinity and
specificity on the Nanog promoter. Here, we demonstrate that Zic3 functions as a 
transcriptional activator of the Nanog promoter in three ways: (a) Nanog
transcript levels are sustained with Zic3 overexpression in differentiating ESCs,
(b) Zic3 depletion in ESCs downregulates Nanog promoter activity, and (c) Zic3
overexpression leads to increased Nanog promoter activity. Furthermore, the
activity of a mutant Nanog promoter with ablated Oct4/Sox2 binding is rescued by 
Zic3 overexpression to nearly wild-type levels. This indicates that Nanog is a
positive transcriptional target of Zic3 in a mechanism that is independent of
Oct4/Sox2 binding. Hence, we demonstrate an important pathway for regulation of
Nanog expression in pluripotent ESCs through direct activation by Zic3.

Copyright © 2010 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 20872845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Pediatr Res. 2010 Oct;68(4):275-80. doi: 10.1203/00006450-201011001-00539.

A mouse model of conduction system patterning abnormalities in heterotaxy
syndrome.

Czosek RJ(1), Haaning A, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Duplication or absence of parts of the specialized cardiac conduction system in
patients with heterotaxy syndrome causes significant clinical disease, but the
mechanistic basis by which embryonic disruption of left-right patterning alters
conduction system patterning in these patients is not well understood. We sought 
to determine whether a mouse model of X-linked human heterotaxy recapitulates
conduction system abnormalities identified in patients with heterotaxy. Cardiac
structure and conduction system patterning were evaluated in Zic3 null embryos
from e9.5 to e16.5 using genetic and molecular methods. Severe structural
abnormalities involving atrial, ventricular, and conotruncal development were
associated with a spectrum of disorganized and ambiguous arrangements throughout 
the conduction system, including the appearance of duplicated structures. The
severity and location of conduction system abnormalities correlated with the
severity and location of associated structural heart disease and were
identifiable at the earliest stages examined. The Zic3 mouse model provides a
novel tool to dissect the mechanistic underpinnings of conduction system
patterning and dysfunction and its relationship to cardiovascular malformations, 
making it a promising model to improve understanding and risk assessment in the
clinical arena.

PMCID: PMC2940945
PMID: 20581739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Res Notes. 2010 Jun 16;3:167. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-3-167.

Expression of the zic1, zic2, zic3, and zic4 genes in early chick embryos.

McMahon AR(1), Merzdorf CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Montana State University,
Bozeman, MT 59717, USA. merzdorf@montana.edu.

BACKGROUND: The zic genes encode a family of transcription factors with important
roles during early development. Since little is known about zic gene expression
in chick embryos, we have characterized the expression patterns of the zic1,
zic2, zic3, and zic4 (zic1-4) genes during neurulation and somitogenesis.
FINDINGS: We used in situ hybridization to analyze the expression patterns of the
zic1-4 genes during early chick development (HH stages 7-19). The zic1-3 genes
showed both overlapping and gene-specific expression patterns along the length of
the dorsal neural tube and in the dorsal parts of the somites. In addition,
unique expression domains of zic genes included: zic2 in the neural plate,
periotic mesoderm and limb buds; zic3 in the paraxial mesoderm surrounding the
neural plate, in presomitic mesoderm and in the most recently formed epithelial
somites; zic2 and zic3 in developing eyes. zic4 expression was limited to dorsal 
fore- and midbrain regions and, unlike the expression of the zic1-3 genes, zic4
expression was not detected in the hindbrain and trunk. This was in contrast to
more extensive zic4 expression in other vertebrates.
CONCLUSIONS: The zic1-3 genes were expressed in both overlapping and unique
domains within the neural tube, somites and other ectoderm and mesoderm-derived
structures in the future head and trunk. zic4 expression, however, was limited to
dorso-anterior regions of the future brain. This is the first comprehensive study
of zic1-4 gene expression in chick embryos during neurulation and somitogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2908108
PMID: 20553611  [PubMed]


47. Pediatr Surg Int. 2010 Aug;26(8):769-81. doi: 10.1007/s00383-010-2622-5. Epub
2010 Jun 13.

Review of genetic factors in intestinal malrotation.

Martin V(1), Shaw-Smith C.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.

Intestinal malrotation is well covered in the surgical literature from the point 
of view of operative management, but few reviews to date have attempted to
provide a comprehensive examination of the topic from the point of view of
aetiology, in particular genetic aetiology. Following a brief overview of
molecular embryology of midgut rotation, we present in this article instances of 
and case reports and case series of intestinal malrotation in which a genetic
aetiology is likely. Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked and
chromosomal forms of the disorder are represented. Most occur in syndromic form, 
that is to say, in association with other malformations. In many instances,
recognition of a specific syndrome is possible, one of several examples discussed
being the recently described association of intestinal malrotation with alveolar 
capillary dysplasia, due to mutations in the forkhead box transcription factor
FOXF1. New advances in sequencing technology mean that the identification of the 
genes mutated in these disorders is more accessible than ever, and paediatric
surgeons are encouraged to refer to their colleagues in clinical genetics where a
genetic aetiology seems likely.

PMCID: PMC2908440
PMID: 20549505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Med Genet. 2010 May;47(5):351-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.060913.

Polyalanine expansion in the ZIC3 gene leading to X-linked heterotaxy with
VACTERL association: a new polyalanine disorder?

Wessels MW, Kuchinka B, Heydanus R, Smit BJ, Dooijes D, de Krijger RR, Lequin MH,
de Jong EM, Husen M, Willems PJ, Casey B.

BACKGROUND: The VACTERL association is a non-random association of congenital
defects with an unknown aetiology in the majority of patients.
METHODS: A male newborn is reported with features of the VACTERL association,
including anal atresia, laryngeal and oesophageal atresia with
tracheo-oesophageal fistula, dextroposition of the heart with persistent left
superior vena cava, and unilateral multicystic kidney. As the clinical picture of
this patient overlaps with that of X-linked heterotaxy caused by ZIC3 mutations, 
the ZIC3 coding region was sequenced.
RESULTS: In a patient with the VACTERL association a 6-nucleotide insertion was
found in the GCC repeat of the ZIC3 gene, which is predicted to expand the
amino-terminal polyalanine repeat from 10 to 12 polyalanines. The polyalanine
expansion is a novel ZIC3 mutation which was not found in 336 chromosomes from
192 ethnically matched controls. The mutation was also not present in the mother,
suggesting it occurred de novo in the patient and is therefore a pathogenetic
mutation.
CONCLUSION: It is hypothesized that this novel and de novo polyalanine expansion 
in ZIC3 contributes to the VACTERL association in this patient. A newborn male is
described with features of the VACTERL association, including anal atresia,
laryngeal and oesophageal atresia with tracheo-oesophageal fistula,
dextroposition of the heart with persistent left superior vena cava, and
unilateral multicystic kidney. As the clinical picture of the VACTERL association
overlaps with X-linked heterotaxy caused by ZIC3 mutations, the ZIC3 coding
region was sequenced, and a 6-nucleotide insertion was found that is predicted to
expand the amino-terminal polyalanine repeat from 10 to 12 polyalanines. This
novel mutation was not present in the mother, nor in 336 chromosomes from 192
ethnically matched controls. It is hypothesised that this novel and de novo
polyalanine expansion in the ZIC3 gene contributes to the VACTERL association in 
this patient.

PMID: 20452998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. BMC Cancer. 2010 Mar 3;10:79. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-79.

Expression of ZIC family genes in meningiomas and other brain tumors.

Aruga J(1), Nozaki Y, Hatayama M, Odaka YS, Yokota N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Zic zinc finger proteins are present in the developing rodent
meninges and are required for cell proliferation and differentiation of meningeal
progenitors. Although human ZIC genes are known to be molecular markers for
medulloblastomas, their expression in meningioma has not been addressed to date.
METHODS: We examined the mRNA and protein expression of human ZIC1, ZIC2, ZIC3,
ZIC4 and ZIC5 genes in meningiomas in comparison to other brain tumors, using
RT-PCR, analysis of published microarray data, and immunostaining.
RESULTS: ZIC1, ZIC2 and ZIC5 transcript levels in meningiomas were higher than
those in whole brain or normal dura mater, whereas all five ZIC genes were
abundantly expressed in medulloblastomas. The expression level of ZIC1 in public 
microarray data was greater in meningiomas classified as World Health
Organization Grade II (atypical) than those classified as Grade I (benign).
Immunoscreening using anti-ZIC antibodies revealed that 23 out of 23 meningioma
cases were ZIC1/2/3/5-immunopositive. By comparison, nuclear staining by the
anti-ZIC4 antibody was not observed in any meningioma case, but was strongly
detected in all four medulloblastomas. ZIC-positive meningiomas included
meningothelial, fibrous, transitional, and psammomatous histological subtypes. In
normal meninges, ZIC-like immunoreactivities were detected in vimentin-expressing
arachnoid cells both in human and mouse.
CONCLUSIONS: ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC5 are novel molecular markers for meningiomas
whereas ZIC4 expression is highly selective for medulloblastomas. The pattern of 
ZIC expression in both of these tumor types may reflect the properties of the
tissues from which the tumors are derived.

PMCID: PMC2838823
PMID: 20199689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Biol. 2010 Jan 20;8:5. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-5.

Regeneration and reprogramming compared.

Christen B(1), Robles V, Raya M, Paramonov I, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine of Barcelona, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Dedifferentiation occurs naturally in mature cell types during
epimorphic regeneration in fish and some amphibians. Dedifferentiation also
occurs in the induction of pluripotent stem cells when a set of transcription
factors (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc) is over expressed in mature cell types.
RESULTS: We hypothesised that there are parallels between dedifferentiation or
reprogramming of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells and the natural 
process of dedifferentiation during epimorphic regeneration. We analysed
expression levels of the most commonly used pluripotency associated factors in
regenerating and non-regenerating tissue and compared them with levels in a
pluripotent reference cell. We found that some of the pluripotency associated
factors (oct4/pou5f1, sox2, c-myc, klf4, tert, sall4, zic3, dppa2/4 and fut1, a
homologue of ssea1) were expressed before and during regeneration and that at
least two of these factors (oct4, sox2) were also required for normal fin
regeneration in the zebrafish. However these factors were not upregulated during 
regeneration as would be expected if blastema cells acquired pluripotency.
CONCLUSIONS: By comparing cells from the regeneration blastema with embryonic
pluripotent reference cells we found that induced pluripotent stem and blastema
cells do not share pluripotency. However, during blastema formation some of the
key reprogramming factors are both expressed and are also required for
regeneration to take place. We therefore propose a link between partially
reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells and the half way state of blastema
cells and suggest that a common mechanism might be regulating these two
processes.

PMCID: PMC2826312
PMID: 20089153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Heart. 2010 May;96(9):673-7. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2009.181685. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Familial transposition of the great arteries caused by multiple mutations in
laterality genes.

De Luca A(1), Sarkozy A, Consoli F, Ferese R, Guida V, Dentici ML, Mingarelli R, 
Bellacchio E, Tuo G, Limongelli G, Digilio MC, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Mendel Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. a.deluca@css-mendel.it

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is
still largely unknown. In general, TGA is not associated with the more common
genetic disorders nor with extracardiac anomalies, whereas it can be found in
individuals with lateralisation defects, heterotaxy and asplenia syndrome (right 
isomerism).
OBJECTIVE: To analyse genes previously associated with heterotaxy in order to
assess mutations in familial TGA unassociated with other features of laterality
defects.
METHODS: Probands of seven families with isolated TGA and a family history of
concordant or discordant congenital heart disease were screened for mutations in 
the ZIC3, ACVR2B, LEFTYA, CFC1, NODAL, FOXH1, GDF1, CRELD1, GATA4 and NKX2.5
genes.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis allowed the identification of three sequence
variations in two out of seven TGA probands. A FOXH1 (Pro21Ser) missense variant 
was found in a proband who was also heterozogous for an amino acid substitution
(Gly17Cys) in the ZIC3 gene. This ZIC3 variant was also found in another family
member with a second sequence variation (Val150Ile) in the NKX2.5 gene
homeodomain who was affected by multiple ventricular septal defects. A second
proband was found to harbour a splice site variant (IVS2-1G-->C) in the NODAL
gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides evidence that some cases of familial TGA 
are caused by mutations in laterality genes and therefore are part of the same
disease spectrum of heterotaxy syndrome, and argues for an oligogenic or complex 
mode of inheritance in these pedigrees.

PMID: 19933292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 13;106(41):17437-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906352106. Epub 2009 Sep 28.

BMP inhibition initiates neural induction via FGF signaling and Zic genes.

Marchal L(1), Luxardi G, Thomé V, Kodjabachian L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie du Développement de Marseille Luminy, UMR 6216,
CNRS-Université de la Méditerranée, 13288 Marseille Cedex 09, France.

Neural induction is the process that initiates nervous system development in
vertebrates. Two distinct models have been put forward to describe this
phenomenon in molecular terms. The default model states that ectoderm cells are
fated to become neural in absence of instruction, and do so when bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signals are abolished. A more recent view implicates 
a conserved role for FGF signaling that collaborates with BMP inhibition to allow
neural fate specification. Using the Xenopus embryo, we obtained evidence that
may unite the 2 views. We show that a dominant-negative R-Smad,
Smad5-somitabun-unlike the other BMP inhibitors used previously-can trigger
conversion of Xenopus epidermis into neural tissue in vivo. However, it does so
only if FGF activity is uncompromised. We report that this activity may be
encoded by FGF4, as its expression is activated upon BMP inhibition, and its
knockdown suppresses endogenous, as well as ectopic, neural induction by
Smad5-somitabun. Supporting the importance of FGF instructive activity, we report
the isolation of 2 immediate early neural targets, zic3 and foxD5a. Conversely,
we found that zic1 can be activated by BMP inhibition in the absence of
translation. Finally, Zic1 and Zic3 are required together for definitive neural
fate acquisition, both in ectopic and endogenous situations. We propose to merge 
the previous models into a unique one whereby neural induction is controlled by
BMP inhibition, which activates directly, and, via FGF instructive activity,
early neural regulators such as Zic genes.

PMCID: PMC2765096
PMID: 19805078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Pediatr. 2010 Feb;169(2):207-13. doi: 10.1007/s00431-009-1008-y. Epub 2009 
Jun 13.

DNA hypomethylation, transient neonatal diabetes, and prune belly sequence in one
of two identical twins.

Laborie LB(1), Mackay DJ, Temple IK, Molven A, Søvik O, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.

One known genetic mechanism for transient neonatal diabetes is loss of
methylation at 6q24. The etiology of prune belly sequence is unknown but a
genetic defect, affecting the mesoderm from which the triad abdominal muscle
hypoplasia, urinary tract abnormalities, and cryptorchidism develop, has been
suggested. We investigated a family, including one twin, with transient neonatal 
diabetes and prune belly sequence. Autoantibody tests excluded type 1 diabetes.
Microsatellite marker analysis confirmed the twins being monozygotic. We
identified no mutations in ZFP57, KCNJ11, ABCC8, GCK, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF3B, IPF1, 
PAX4, or ZIC3. The proband had loss of methylation at the 6q24 locus TNDM and
also at the loci IGF2R, DIRAS3, and PEG1, while the other family members,
including the healthy monozygotic twin, had normal findings. The loss of
methylation on chromosome 6q24 and elsewhere may indicate a generalized maternal 
hypomethylation syndrome, which accounts for both transient neonatal diabetes and
prune belly sequence.

PMID: 19521719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Biol. 2009 May 1;329(1):80-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.019. Epub 2009
Feb 26.

foxD5 plays a critical upstream role in regulating neural ectodermal fate and the
onset of neural differentiation.

Yan B(1), Neilson KM, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, D.C. 20037, USA.

foxD5 is expressed in the nascent neural ectoderm concomitant with several other 
neural-fate specifying transcription factors. We used loss-of-function and
gain-of-function approaches to analyze the functional position of foxD5 amongst
these other factors. Loss of FoxD5 reduces the expression of sox2, sox11, soxD,
zic1, zic3 and Xiro1-3 at the onset of gastrulation, and of geminin, sox3 and
zic2, which are maternally expressed, by late gastrulation. At neural plate
stages most of these genes remain reduced, but the domains of zic1 and zic3 are
expanded. Increased FoxD5 induces geminin and zic2, weakly represses sox11 at
early gastrula but later (st12) induces it; weakly represses sox2 and sox3
transiently and strongly represses soxD, zic1, zic3 and Xiro1-3. The foxD5
effects on zic1, zic3 and Xiro1-3 involve transcriptional repression, whereas
those on geminin and zic2 involve transcriptional activation. foxD5's effects on 
geminin, sox11 and zic2 occur at the onset of gastrulation, whereas the other
genes require earlier foxD5 activity. geminin, sox11 and zic2, each of which is
up-regulated directly by foxD5, are all required to account for foxD5 phenotypes,
indicating that this triad constitutes a transcriptional network rather than
linear path that coordinately up-regulates genes that promote an immature neural 
fate and inhibits genes that promote the onset of neural differentiation. We also
show that foxD5 promotes an ectopic neural fate in the epidermis by reducing BMP 
signaling. Several of the genes that are repressed by foxD5 in turn reduce foxD5 
expression, contributing to the medial-lateral patterning of the neural plate.

PMCID: PMC2672197
PMID: 19250931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Neoplasia. 2009 Feb;11(2):167-76.

Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines are characterized by a specific miRNA expression
profile.

Gibcus JH(1), Tan LP, Harms G, Schakel RN, de Jong D, Blokzijl T, Möller P,
Poppema S, Kroesen BJ, van den Berg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen and University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is derived from preapoptotic germinal center B cells,
although a general loss of B cell phenotype is noted. Using quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and miRNA microarray, we determined the
microRNA (miRNA) profile of HL and compared this with the profile of a panel of
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The two methods showed a strong correlation for the
detection of miRNA expression levels. The HL-specific miRNA included miR-17-92
cluster members, miR-16, miR-21, miR-24, and miR-155. Using a large panel of cell
lines, we found differential expression between HL and other B-cell
lymphoma-derived cell lines for 27 miRNA. A significant down-regulation in HL
compared to non-Hodgkin lymphoma was observed only for miR-150. Next, we
performed target gene validation of predicted target genes for miR-155, which is 
highly expressed in HL and is differentially expressed between HL and Burkitt
lymphoma. Using luciferase reporter assays, we validated 11 predicted miR-155
target genes in three different HL cell lines. We demonstrated that AGTR1, FGF7, 
ZNF537, ZIC3, and IKBKE are true miR-155 target genes in HL.

PMCID: PMC2631141
PMID: 19177201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Nov 15;17(22):3459-73. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn239. Epub 2008 Aug
20.

Functional and structural basis of the nuclear localization signal in the ZIC3
zinc finger domain.

Hatayama M(1), Tomizawa T, Sakai-Kato K, Bouvagnet P, Kose S, Imamoto N, Yokoyama
S, Utsunomiya-Tate N, Mikoshiba K, Kigawa T, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

Disruptions in ZIC3 cause heterotaxy, a congenital anomaly of the left-right
axis. ZIC3 encodes a nuclear protein with a zinc finger (ZF) domain that contains
five tandem C2H2 ZF motifs. Missense mutations in the first ZF motif (ZF1) result
in defective nuclear localization, which may underlie the pathogenesis of
heterotaxy. Here we revealed the structural and functional basis of the nuclear
localization signal (NLS) of ZIC3 and investigated its relationship to the defect
caused by ZF1 mutation. The ZIC3 NLS was located in the ZF2 and ZF3 regions,
rather than ZF1. Several basic residues interspersed throughout these regions
were responsible for the nuclear localization, but R320, K337 and R350 were
particularly important. NMR structure analysis revealed that ZF1-4 had a similar 
structure to GLI ZF, and the basic side chains of the NLS clustered together in
two regions on the protein surface, similar to classical bipartite NLSs. Among
the residues for the ZF1 mutations, C253 and H286 were positioned for the metal
chelation, whereas W255 was positioned in the hydrophobic core formed by ZF1 and 
ZF2. Tryptophan 255 was a highly conserved inter-finger connector and formed part
of a structural motif (tandem CXW-C-H-H) that is shared with GLI, Glis and some
fungal ZF proteins. Furthermore, we found that knockdown of Karyopherin
alpha1/alpha6 impaired ZIC3 nuclear localization, and physical interactions
between the NLS and the nuclear import adapter proteins were disturbed by
mutations in the NLS but not by W255G. These results indicate that ZIC3 is
imported into the cell nucleus by the Karyopherin (Importin) system and that the 
impaired nuclear localization by the ZF1 mutation is not due to a direct
influence on the NLS.

PMCID: PMC2572694
PMID: 18716025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. BMC Syst Biol. 2008 May 22;2:46. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-46.

Transcription profiling of lung adenocarcinomas of c-myc-transgenic mice:
identification of the c-myc regulatory gene network.

Reymann S(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Center for Drug 
Research and Medical Biotechnology, Nikolai-Fuchs-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. reymann@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional regulator c-Myc is the most frequently
deregulated oncogene in human tumors. Targeted overexpression of this gene in
mice results in distinct types of lung adenocarcinomas. By using microarray
technology, alterations in the expression of genes were captured based on a
female transgenic mouse model in which, indeed, c-Myc overexpression in alveolar 
epithelium results in the development of bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma (BAC) and 
papillary adenocarcinoma (PLAC). In this study, we analyzed exclusively the
promoters of induced genes by different in silico methods in order to elucidate
the c-Myc transcriptional regulatory network.
RESULTS: We analyzed the promoters of 361 transcriptionally induced genes with
respect to c-Myc binding sites and found 110 putative binding sites in 94
promoters. Furthermore, we analyzed the flanking sequences (+/- 100 bp) around
the 110 c-Myc binding sites and found Ap2, Zf5, Zic3, and E2f binding sites to be
overrepresented in these regions. Then, we analyzed the promoters of 361 induced 
genes with respect to binding sites of other transcription factors (TFs) which
were upregulated by c-Myc overexpression. We identified at least one binding site
of at least one of these TFs in 220 promoters, thus elucidating a potential
transcription factor network. The analysis correlated well with the significant
overexpression of the TFs Atf2, Foxf1a, Smad4, Sox4, Sp3 and Stat5a. Finally, we 
analyzed promoters of regulated genes which where apparently not regulated by
c-Myc or other c-Myc targeted TFs and identified overrepresented Oct1, Mzf1,
Ppargamma, Plzf, Ets, and HmgIY binding sites when compared against control
promoter background.
CONCLUSION: Our in silico data suggest a model of a transcriptional regulatory
network in which different TFs act in concert upon c-Myc overexpression. We
determined molecular rules for transcriptional regulation to explain, in part,
the carcinogenic effect seen in mice overexpressing the c-Myc oncogene.

PMCID: PMC2430022
PMID: 18498649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurosci. 2008 Apr 30;28(18):4712-25. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5735-07.2008.

Zic deficiency in the cortical marginal zone and meninges results in cortical
lamination defects resembling those in type II lissencephaly.

Inoue T(1), Ogawa M, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis (Behavioral and Developmental
Disorders), RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The formation of the highly organized cortical structure depends on the
production and correct placement of the appropriate number and types of neurons. 
The Zic family of zinc-finger transcription factors plays essential roles in
regulating the proliferation and differentiation of neuronal progenitors in the
medial forebrain and the cerebellum. Examination of the expression of Zic genes
demonstrated that Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 were expressed by the progenitor cells in 
the septum and cortical hem, the sites of generation of the Cajal-Retzius (CR)
cells. Immunohistochemical studies have revealed that Zic proteins were
abundantly expressed in the meningeal cells and that the majority of the CR cells
distributed in the medial and dorsal cortex also expressed Zic proteins in the
mid-late embryonic and postnatal cortical marginal zones. During embryonic
cortical development, Zic1/Zic3 double-mutant and hypomorphic Zic2 mutant mice
showed a reduction in the number of CR cells in the rostral cortex, whereas the
cell number remained unaffected in the caudal cortex. These mutants also showed
mislocalization of the CR cells and cortical lamination defects, resembling the
changes noted in type II (cobblestone) lissencephaly, throughout the brain. In
the Zic1/3 mutant, reduced proliferation of the meningeal cells was observed
before the thinner and disrupted organization of the pial basement membrane (BM) 
with reduced expression of the BM components and the meningeal cell-derived
secretory factor. These defects correlated with the changes in the end feet
morphology of the radial glial cells. These findings indicate that the Zic genes 
play critical roles in cortical development through regulating the proliferation 
of meningeal cells and the pial BM assembly.

PMID: 18448648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Virol. 2008 Jun;82(11):5295-306. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02380-07. Epub 2008 Mar 26.

MicroRNA-155 is an Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene that modulates Epstein-Barr
virus-regulated gene expression pathways.

Yin Q(1), McBride J, Fewell C, Lacey M, Wang X, Lin Z, Cameron J, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium, New Orleans, USA.

The cellular microRNA miR-155 has been shown to be involved in lymphocyte
activation and is expressed in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-infected cells displaying
type III latency gene expression but not type I latency gene expression. We show 
here that the elevated levels of miR-155 in type III latency cells is due to EBV 
gene expression and not epigenetic differences in cell lines tested, and we show 
that expression in EBV-infected cells requires a conserved AP-1 element in the
miR-155 promoter. Gene expression analysis was carried out in a type I latency
cell line transduced with an miR-155-expressing retrovirus. This analysis
identified both miR-155-suppressed and -induced cellular mRNAs and suggested that
in addition to direct targeting of 3' untranslated regions (UTRs), miR-155 alters
gene expression in part through the alteration of signal transduction pathways.
3' UTR reporter analysis of predicted miR-155 target genes identified the
transcriptional regulatory genes encoding BACH1, ZIC3, HIVEP2, CEBPB, ZNF652,
ARID2, and SMAD5 as miR-155 targets. Western blot analysis of the most highly
suppressed of these, BACH1, showed lower expression in cells transduced with a
miR-155 retrovirus. Inspection of the promoters from genes regulated in
EBV-infected cells and in cells infected with an miR-155 retrovirus identified
potential binding sequences for BACH1 and ZIC3. Together, these experiments
suggest that the induction of miR-155 by EBV contributes to EBV-mediated
signaling in part through the modulation of transcriptional regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC2395216
PMID: 18367535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2008 Apr 12;363(1495):1371-5. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2007.2254.

Calcium signalling during neural induction in Xenopus laevis embryos.

Moreau M(1), Néant I, Webb SE, Miller AL, Leclerc C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547 and GDR 2688, Université Paul
Sabatier, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France. moreau@cict.fr

In Xenopus, experiments performed with isolated ectoderm suggest that neural
determination is a 'by default' mechanism, which occurs when bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs) are antagonized by extracellular antagonists, BMP being
responsible for the determination of epidermis. However, Ca(2+) imaging of intact
Xenopus embryos reveals patterns of Ca(2+) transients which are generated via the
activation of dihydropyridine-sensitive Ca(2+) channels in the dorsal ectoderm
but not in the ventral ectoderm. These increases in the concentration of
intracellular Ca(2+)([Ca(2+)]i) appear to be necessary and sufficient to orient
the ectodermal cells towards a neural fate as increasing the [Ca(2+)]i
artificially results in neuralization of the ectoderm. We constructed a
subtractive cDNA library between untreated and caffeine-treated ectoderms (to
increase [Ca(2+)]i) and then identified early Ca(2+)-sensitive target genes
expressed in the neural territories. One of these genes, an arginine
methyltransferase, controls the expression of the early proneural gene, Zic3.
Here, we discuss the evidence for the existence of an alternative model to the
'by default' mechanism, where Ca(2+) plays a central regulatory role in the
expression of Zic3, an early proneural gene, and in epidermal determination which
only occurs when the Ca(2+)-dependent signalling pathways are inactive.

PMCID: PMC2610125
PMID: 18198153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Mutat. 2008 Jan;29(1):99-105.

Characterization of the interactions of human ZIC3 mutants with GLI3.

Zhu L(1), Zhou G, Poole S, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

ZIC3, a GLI superfamily transcription factor, is involved in establishing normal 
embryonic left-right patterning. Multiple abnormalities in the central nervous
system (CNS) and axial skeleton have also been observed in mice bearing a Zic3
null allele, mice with a Zic3 overexpression allele, and the majority of patients
carrying ZIC3 mutations. Previous studies indicate that ZIC3 protein can bind to 
the GLI consensus binding site (GLIBS) and physically interact with GLI3, a
transcription factor involved in multiple aspects of neural and skeletal
development. We investigated in vitro interactions of ZIC3 with GLI3 and the
effect of ZIC3 mutations identified in patients with either heterotaxy or
isolated cardiovascular malformations. Electrophoresis mobility shift assay
(EMSA) revealed that all five intact zinc finger (ZF) domains were necessary for 
binding of ZIC3 to GLIBS. Inclusion of GLIBS upstream of a basal TK promoter had 
no effect on the activation of the promoter by ZIC3 alone, but it enhanced the
synergistic activation of ZIC3 and GLI3. Wild-type (WT) ZIC3 showed specific
binding to GLI3 in GST-pull-down assays. Nonsense and frameshift ZIC3 mutants
lacking one or more of the zinc finger domains did not physically interact with
GST-GLI3; however, two missense mutants c.1213A>G (p.K405E, fifth ZF domain), and
c.649C>G (p.P217A, conserved N-terminal domain) retained binding. Luciferase
reporter assays indicated that both p.P217A and p.K405E mutants also retained
coactivation with GLI3 of reporter gene expression activity, while all the
GLI3-nonbinding ZIC3 mutants lacked this activity. Interestingly, no CNS or
skeletal abnormalities were observed in patients bearing the p.P217A or p.K405E
mutations.

Published 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17764085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Neurosci. 2007 May 16;27(20):5461-73.

Zic1 and Zic3 regulate medial forebrain development through expansion of neuronal
progenitors.

Inoue T(1), Ota M, Ogawa M, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The medial telencephalon is a source of neurons that follow distinct tangential
trajectories of migration to various structures such as the cerebral cortex,
striatum, and olfactory bulb. In the present study, we characterized the
forebrain anomalies in Zic1/Zic3 compound mutant mice. Zic1 and Zic3 were
strongly expressed in the medial structures, including the septum, medial
cerebral cortex, and choroid plexus. Mice homozygous for the Zic1 mutant allele
together with the null Zic3 allele showed medial forebrain defects, which were
not obvious in either Zic1 or Zic3 single mutants. Absence of both Zic1 and Zic3 
caused hypoplasia of the hippocampus, septum, and olfactory bulb. Analysis of the
cell cycle revealed that the cell cycle exit rate was increased in the septa of
double mutants. Misexpression of Zic3 in the ventricular layer of the cerebral
cortex inhibited neuronal differentiation. These results indicated that both Zic1
and Zic3 function in maintaining neural precursor cells in an undifferentiated
state. The functions of these genes may be essential to increasing neural cell
numbers regionally in the medial telencephalon and to proper mediolateral
patterning of the telencephalon.

PMID: 17507568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Jul;217(7):541-7. Epub 2007 May 15.

Insights into the evolutionary history of the vertebrate zic3 locus from a
teleost-specific zic6 gene in the zebrafish, Danio rerio.

Keller MJ(1), Chitnis AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NIH/NICHD, 6 Center Drive, 6B/3B315,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. kellermi@mail.nih.gov

The Zic gene family of zinc-finger transcription factors includes five
orthologues, zic1-5, that are common to the Euteleostian vertebrates (fish,
frogs, birds, and mammals). The Zic genes have been implicated as regulators of a
number of critical developmental processes, including neurulation, neuronal
differentiation, neural crest specification, the establishment of left-right
asymmetry, and regulation of cell proliferation. The different Zic genes encode
proteins that are expressed in broadly overlapping spatial domains, have
conserved DNA-binding domains that recognize a common motif, are capable of
physical interactions, and can co-regulate one another's transcription. Thus, the
transcriptional regulation of individual proteins and their effects on downstream
targets must be assessed within the context of co-expression with other family
members. We describe a novel gene, zic6, that is specific to the teleost fishes
and lacks the lateral and rostral expression domains typical of the other Zic
family members. We present evidence that zic6 is an ancestral locus arising by
chromosomal duplication early in the Euteleostomi that was subsequently lost in
the terrestrial vertebrates.

PMID: 17503076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 15;306(2):669-84. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Zic2 and Zic3 synergistically control neurulation and segmentation of paraxial
mesoderm in mouse embryo.

Inoue T(1), Ota M, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic family zinc-finger proteins play various roles in animal development. In
mice, five Zic genes (Zic1-5) have been reported. Despite the partly overlapping 
expression profiles of these genes, mouse mutants for each Zic show distinct
phenotypes. To uncover possible redundant roles, we characterized Zic2/Zic3
compound mutant mice. Zic2 and Zic3 are both expressed in presomitic mesoderm,
forming and newly generated somites with differential spatiotemporal
accentuation. Mice heterozygous for the hypomorphic Zic2 allele together with
null Zic3 allele generally showed severe malformations of the axial skeleton,
including asymmetric or rostro-caudally bridged vertebrae, and reduction of the
number of caudal vertebral bones, that are not obvious in single mutants. These
defects were preceded by perturbed somitic marker expression, and reduced
paraxial mesoderm progenitors in the primitive streak. These results suggest that
Zic2 and Zic3 cooperatively control the segmentation of paraxial mesoderm at
multiple stages. In addition to the segmentation abnormality, the compound mutant
also showed neural tube defects that ran the entire rostro-caudal extent
(craniorachischisis), suggesting that neurulation is another developmental
process where Zic2 and Zic3 have redundant functions.

PMID: 17490632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jul 15;16(14):1649-60. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Identification of a novel role of ZIC3 in regulating cardiac development.

Zhu L(1), Harutyunyan KG, Peng JL, Wang J, Schwartz RJ, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mutations in ZIC3 cause X-linked heterotaxy, a disorder characterized by abnormal
lateralization of normally asymmetric thoracic and abdominal organs. Animal
models demonstrate an early role for ZIC3 in embryonic left-right (LR)
patterning. ZIC3 mutations have also been described in patients with isolated
cardiovascular malformations. We wished to address the hypothesis that ZIC3 has
plieotropic effects in development and may regulate cardiac development
independent of its role in LR patterning. We observed significantly reduced
expression of several markers of cardiac lineage commitment in Zic3(null/y)
embryonic stem cells including atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), Nkx2.5 and Tbx5. 
Likewise, ANF expression-a molecular marker of trabecular myocardium and a direct
target of multiple cardiac-specific transcription factors-was severely reduced in
E9.5 Zic3 null hearts. Trabecular myocardium was reduced in these embryos. This
finding was similar to that observed in embryos with cardiac-specific ablation of
serum response factor (SRF), a direct transcriptional regulator of ANF
expression. While ZIC3 by itself had no effect on the ANF promoter, it could bind
to and inhibit a cardiac alpha-actin promoter through its zinc finger domains. We
observed that ZIC3 could function as a coactivator of SRF on both cardiac
alpha-actin and ANF promoters. The zinc fingers of ZIC3 and the mcm1, agamous
deficiens SRF (MADS) box motif of SRF were found to mediate their physical and
functional interactions. These findings reveal a novel role of ZIC3 in regulating
cardiac gene expression and may explain, in part, the association of ZIC3
mutation with cardiovascular malformations.

PMID: 17468179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jun;28(6):563-70.

Elucidation of penetrance variability of a ZIC3 mutation in a family with complex
heart defects and functional analysis of ZIC3 mutations in the first zinc finger 
domain.

Chhin B(1), Hatayama M, Bozon D, Ogawa M, Schön P, Tohmonda T, Sassolas F, Aruga 
J, Valard AG, Chen SC, Bouvagnet P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Equipe de Recherche Methodologique (ERM) 0107, Bron, France.

We studied a series of 42 cases of transposition of the great arteries (TGA), a
complex heart defect (CHD) that is two times more prevalent in males than in
females. A mutation in the X chromosome at the ZIC3 gene was found in two
affected siblings (one male, one female) and their unaffected mother. A second
factor, skewed X-inactivation pattern explained the discrepancy between the
daughter/mother phenotype. In this family, the missense mutation (p.W255G) was
found in the first zinc finger of ZIC3, a domain that is relatively specific to
each of the five human ZIC genes. It was tested further along with two other
mutations of this domain (p.C253S and p.H286R). In transfected 3T3 cells, mutants
p.W255G and p.H286R expressed lower protein levels, and an increased protein
degradation (p.W255G only). Moreover, mutants p.C253S and p.W255G had a decreased
transcription activation of the TK-luciferase reporter gene. Nuclear
translocation of the three ZIC3 mutants varied considerably depending on the
experimental models. Finally, p.W255G and p.H286R showed diminished activities
for both left-right axis disturbance and neural crest induction in Xenopus
embryos. These results suggest that mutations in the first zinc finger of ZIC3
mildly affect several functions of the protein.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17295247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Apr;18(4):1348-58. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Zic3 is required for maintenance of pluripotency in embryonic stem cells.

Lim LS(1), Loh YH, Zhang W, Li Y, Chen X, Wang Y, Bakre M, Ng HH, Stanton LW.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Group, Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome 
Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

Embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency is dependent upon sustained expression of
the key transcriptional regulators Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2. Dissection of the
regulatory networks downstream of these transcription factors has provided
critical insight into the molecular mechanisms that regulate ES cell pluripotency
and early differentiation. Here we describe a role for Zic3, a member of the Gli 
family of zinc finger transcription factors, in the maintenance of pluripotency
in ES cells. We show that Zic3 is expressed in ES cells and that this expression 
is repressed upon differentiation. The expression of Zic3 in pluripotent ES cells
is also directly regulated by Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog. Targeted repression of Zic3 
in human and mouse ES cells by RNA interference-induced expression of several
markers of the endodermal lineage. Notably, the expression of Nanog, a key
pluripotency regulator and repressor of extraembryonic endoderm specification in 
ES cells, was significantly reduced in Zic3 knockdown cells. This suggests that
Zic3 may prevent endodermal marker expression through Nanog-regulated pathways.
Thus our results extend the ES cell transcriptional network beyond Oct4, Nanog,
and Sox2, and further establish that Zic3 plays an important role in the
maintenance of pluripotency by preventing endodermal lineage specification in
embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC1838990
PMID: 17267691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jan 15;16(2):187-98. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Nuclear import and export signals are essential for proper cellular trafficking
and function of ZIC3.

Bedard JE(1), Purnell JD, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Missense, frameshift and nonsense mutations in the zinc finger transcription
factor ZIC3 cause heterotaxy as well as isolated congenital heart disease.
Previously, we developed transactivation and subcellular localization assays to
test the function of ZIC3 point mutations. Aberrant cytoplasmic localization
suggested that the pathogenesis of ZIC3 mutations results, at least in part, from
failure of appropriate cellular trafficking. To further investigate this
hypothesis, the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling properties of ZIC3 have been
examined. Subcellular localization assays designed to span the entire
open-reading frame of wild-type and mutant ZIC3 proteins identified the presence 
of nucleocytoplasmic transport signals. ZIC3 domain mapping indicates that a
relatively large region containing the zinc finger binding sites and a known GLI 
interacting domain is required for transport to the nucleus. Site-directed
mutagenesis of critical residues within two putative nuclear localization signals
(NLSs) leads to loss of nuclear localization. No further decrease was observed
when both NLS sites were mutated, suggesting that mutation of either NLS site is 
sufficient for loss of importin-mediated nuclear localization. Additionally, we
identify a cryptic CRM-1-dependent nuclear export signal (NES) within ZIC3, and
identify a mutation within this region in a patient with heterotaxy. These
results provide the first evidence that control of cellular trafficking of ZIC3
is critical for function and suggest a possible mechanism for transcriptional
control during left-right patterning. Identification of mutations in mapped NLS
or NES domains in heterotaxy patients demonstrates the functional importance of
these domains in cardiac morphogenesis and allows for integration of structural
analysis with developmental function.

PMID: 17185387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Cell. 2006 Dec;11(6):763-74.

Dullard promotes degradation and dephosphorylation of BMP receptors and is
required for neural induction.

Satow R(1), Kurisaki A, Chan TC, Hamazaki TS, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8654, Japan.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) regulate multiple biological processes,
including cellular proliferation, adhesion, differentiation, and early
development. In Xenopus development, inhibition of the BMP pathway is essential
for neural induction. Here, we report that dullard, a gene involved in neural
development, functions as a negative regulator of BMP signaling. We show that
Dullard promotes the ubiquitin-mediated proteosomal degradation of BMP receptors 
(BMPRs). Dullard preferentially complexes with the BMP type II receptor (BMPRII) 
and partially colocalizes with the caveolin-1-positive compartment, suggesting
that Dullard promotes BMPR degradation via the lipid raft-caveolar pathway.
Dullard also associates with BMP type I receptors and represses the BMP-dependent
phosphorylation of the BMP type I receptor. The phosphatase activity of Dullard
is essential for the degradation of BMP receptors and neural induction in
Xenopus. Together, these observations suggest that Dullard is an essential
inhibitor of BMP receptor activation during Xenopus neuralization.

PMID: 17141153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Front Biosci. 2007 Jan 1;12:1680-90.

Craniofacial, skeletal, and cardiac defects associated with altered embryonic
murine Zic3 expression following targeted insertion of a PGK-NEO cassette.

Zhu L(1), Peng JL, Harutyunyan KG, Garcia MD, Justice MJ, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mutation in ZIC3 (OMIM #306955), a zinc finger transcription factor, causes
heterotaxy (situs ambiguus) or isolated congenital heart defects in humans. Mice 
bearing a null mutation in Zic3 have left-right patterning defects with
associated cardiovascular, vertebra/rib, and central nervous system
malformations. Although XZic3 is thought to play a critical role in Xenopus
neural crest development, no defects in tissues derived from neural crest are
apparent in adult Zic3(null) mice. In this study we have characterized the effect
of a PGK-neo cassette insertion 5' of the Zic3 locus. The Zic3 transcript in this
new allele is up-regulated in ES cells and in E9.0 embryos, but no ectopic
expression was detected. Unlike the Zic3(null) mutation in which only 20% of
mutant animals survive to adulthood, there was no evidence of excess fetal death 
caused by the Zic3(neo) allele. Zic3(neo) mutant mice exhibited hemifacial
microsomia, asymmetric low set ears, axial skeletal defects, kyphosis and
scoliosis; a combination of defects which mimics Goldenhar Syndrome. Some
Zic3(neo) mice had evidence of left-right axis patterning defects, but cardiac
malformation was much less common than in the Zic3(null) mutants. A six-week old 
hemizygous mouse was found to have thoraco-cervical ectopia cordis, an extremely 
rare congenital malformation in humans and for which there is no precedent in a
mouse model.

PMID: 17127413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Neurosci. 2007;29(6):468-79. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

The role of XBtg2 in Xenopus neural development.

Sugimoto K(1), Okabayashi K, Sedohara A, Hayata T, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In early neural development, active cell proliferation and apoptosis take place
concurrent with cell differentiation, but how these processes are coordinated
remains unclear. In this study, we characterized the role of XBtg2 in Xenopus
neural development. XBtg2 transcripts were detected at the edge of the
anterolateral neural plate and the neural crest region at the midneurula stage,
and in eyes and in part of the neural tube at the tailbud stage. Translational
inhibition of XBtg2 affected anterior neural development and impaired eye
formation. XBtg2 depletion altered the expression patterns of the early neural
genes, Zic3 and SoxD, at the midneurula stage, but not at the early neurula
stage. At the midneurula stage, XBtg2-depleted embryos exhibited a marked
decrease in the expression of anterior neural genes, En2, Otx2, and Rx1, without 
any changes in neural crest genes, Slug and Snail, or an epidermal gene, XK81.
These results suggest that XBtg2 is required for the differentiation of the
anterior neural plate from the midneurula stage, but not for the specification of
the fate and patterning of the neural plate. XBtg2-depleted embryos also
exhibited an increase in both proliferation and apoptosis in the anterior neural 
plate; however, the altered expression patterns of neural markers were not
reversed by inhibition of either the cell cycle or apoptosis. Based on these
data, we propose that XBtg2 plays an essential role in the anterior neural
development, by regulating neural cell differentiation, and, independently, cell 
proliferation and survival.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17119321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Nov;1763(11):1184-91. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Calcium transients and calcium signalling during early neurogenesis in the
amphibian embryo Xenopus laevis.

Leclerc C(1), Néant I, Webb SE, Miller AL, Moreau M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547 et GDR 2688, Université Paul
Sabatier, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France. leclerc@cict.fr

Development of the vertebrate embryonic nervous system is characterized by a
cascade of signalling events. In Xenopus, the initial step in this cascade
results from signals emanating from the dorsal mesoderm that divert the fate of
the ectoderm from an epidermal to a neural lineage. These signals include
extracellular antagonists of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP). Experiments
performed with isolated ectoderm suggest that epidermis is induced by BMP,
whereas neural fates arise by default following BMP inhibition; however, we show 
that this mechanism is not sufficient for neural determination. Ca2+ imaging of
intact Xenopus embryos reveals patterns of Ca2+ transients in the dorsal ectoderm
but not in the ventral ectoderm. These increases in intracellular calcium
concentration ([Ca2+](i)), which occur via the activation of dihydropyridine
(DHP)-sensitive Ca2+ channels, are necessary and sufficient to orientate the
ectodermal cells toward a neural fate. On the one hand, the treatments that
antagonize the increase in [Ca2+](i), inhibit neuralization, while on the other
hand, an artificial increase in [Ca2+](i), whatever its origin, neuralizes the
ectoderm. Using these properties, we have constructed a subtractive cDNA library 
between untreated ectoderm and caffeine-treated ectoderm. The caffeine stimulates
an increase in [Ca2+](i) and thus orientates the cells towards the neural
pathway. We have identified early Ca2+ target genes expressed in neural
territories. One of these genes, an arginine methyl transferase, controls the
expression of the early proneural gene, Zic3. Here, we discuss an alternative
model where Ca2+ plays a central regulatory role in early neurogenesis. This
model integrates the activation of a Ca2+ -dependent signalling pathway due to an
influx of Ca2+ through DHP-Ca2+ channels. While Ca2+ is required for neural
determination, epidermal determination occurs when Ca2+ -dependent signalling
pathways are inactive.

PMID: 16987559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Methods Mol Med. 2006;126:247-56.

DNA mutation analysis in heterotaxy.

Ware SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Department of Pediatrics,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH, USA.

Heterotaxy refers to the abnormal arrangement of internal organs in relation to
each other. It is characterized by complex cardiac malformations that are thought
to result from abnormal left-right patterning in early embryonic development.
Mutations in four genes have been identified in human heterotaxy. ZIC3, a zinc
finger transcription factor, causes X-linked heterotaxy. EGF-CFC, ACVR2B, and
LEFTYA are all members of a transforming growth factor-beta signal transduction
pathway that is critical for proper left-right development. Point mutations have 
been identified in each of these genes using polymerase chain reaction-based
mutation analysis strategies. ZIC3 mutation screening will be used to illustrate 
the methods for molecular sequence data acquisition and examination. These
techniques are applicable to any gene of interest and will be useful for further 
evaluation of candidate genes for heterotaxy.

PMID: 16930017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006 Dec;14(12):1317-20. Epub 2006 Aug 23.

Heterotaxy and cardiac defect in a girl with chromosome translocation
t(X;1)(q26;p13.1) and involvement of ZIC3.

Tzschach A(1), Hoeltzenbein M, Hoffmann K, Menzel C, Beyer A, Ocker V, Wurster G,
Raynaud M, Ropers HH, Kalscheuer V, Heilbronner H.

Author information: 
(1)Department Ropers, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse
73, 14195 Berlin, Germany. tzschach@molgen.mpg.de

We report on a 2-year-old girl with situs ambiguus comprising right-sided stomach
and spleen, left-sided liver and complex cardiac defect. Psychomotor development 
of this patient was normal, and no other major abnormalities were present.
Chromosome analysis revealed a de novo balanced chromosome translocation
t(X;1)(q26;p13.1). Molecular cytogenetic investigations identified a breakpoint
spanning BAC clone on the X-chromosome containing the ZIC3 gene. Mutations in
ZIC3 are associated with situs ambiguus and cardiac defects predominantly in
males. This is the first report of a live born girl with an X-autosome
translocation involving the ZIC3 region.

PMID: 16926859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Dyn. 2006 Dec;235(12):3379-86.

Xenopus Zic4: conservation and diversification of expression profiles and protein
function among the Xenopus Zic family.

Fujimi TJ(1), Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

We compared the expression and function of Xenopus Zic4 with those of the other
four Xenopus laevis Zic family members (Zic1, Zic2, Zic3, and Zic5). Zic4
expression was detected mainly in the neural plate border, dorsal neural tube,
and somites, and was similar to that of Zic1, which is adjacent to Zic4 on the
same chromosome. Injection of wild-type or mutant Zic4 RNA caused the induction
of neural crest marker gene expression, hyperplastic neural tissue, and ectopic
pigment cell formation, indicating that Zic4 can induce neural and neural crest
tissue, as can other Xenopus Zic genes. Deletion analysis showed that the
zinc-finger domain is critical for many Zic4 functions, but the C-terminal region
is differently involved in induction of two neural crest markers, Slug and Sox10.
The protein function as determined by the animal cap explant assay was similar to
that of Zic5, but different from those of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3, suggesting that
Xenopus Zic genes can be divided into two groups based on function. These results
indicate that the five Xenopus Zic genes cooperatively regulate both neural and
neural crest development, despite significantly diverged expression profiles and 
functions.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16871625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 9;344(3):1031-7. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Pbx1 and Meis1 regulate activity of the Xenopus laevis Zic3 promoter through a
highly conserved region.

Kelly LE(1), Carrel TL, Herman GE, El-Hodiri HM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Human Genetics, Columbus Children's Research
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.

Xenopus Zic3 (zinc finger in the cerebellum-3) is expressed in the dorsal neural 
tube of tailbud embryos and tadpoles. We have isolated a 3.1kb DNA fragment from 
the Xenopus laevis Zic3 locus that drives proper expression of a GFP reporter in 
transgenic frog tailbud embryos and tadpoles. This fragment contains regions that
are highly similar among frogs, mice, and humans. One extremely conserved region 
contains a predicted Pbx binding site. We found that the transcription factors
Pbx1b and Meis1 can bind this site and synergistically transactivate expression
of a reporter containing the conserved region. Finally, we found that an intact
Pbx site is essential for normal Zic3 promoter activity in transgenic frog
embryos. Our data strongly suggest that a highly conserved region of the Zic3
promoter functions by direct interaction with Pbx1b and Meis1.

PMID: 16631621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Apr;22(4):346-8.

[An increase in intracellular free calcium controls the expression of an arginine
N-methyl-transferase involved in neural determination in amphibian embryo].

[Article in French]

Néant I, Leclerc C, Batut J, Vandel L, Moreau M.

PMID: 16597396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jun;235(6):1631-7.

Heart defects in X-linked heterotaxy: evidence for a genetic interaction of Zic3 
with the nodal signaling pathway.

Ware SM(1), Harutyunyan KG, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

The complex cardiac defects that occur in heterotaxy result from abnormal
left-right patterning. Mutations in the zinc finger transcription factor ZIC3
cause X-linked heterotaxy, HTX1. We previously have generated a targeted deletion
of the murine Zic3 locus and demonstrated that these knockout mice correctly
model HTX1. Fifty percent of Zic3 null embryos have cardiac looping anomalies at 
embryonic day 10.5 to 14.5, with ventral looping and sinistral looping as the
predominant phenotypes. The penetrance of these phenotypes is increased in mice
that are also haploinsufficient for Nodal. Zic3(+/-); Nodal (+/-) compound
heterozygous mice are born in significantly reduced numbers (P=0.0001),
indicating a genetic interaction between the loci. Furthermore, an upstream Nodal
enhancer is responsive to Zic3 in both Xenopus and mouse. These studies provide
evidence that Zic3 interacts genetically with Nodal in left-right patterning and 
subsequent cardiac development and delineate a critical Zic3-responsive enhancer 
required for mediating Nodal expression at the node.

Developmental Dynamics 235:1631-1637, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16496285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Dyn. 2006 Mar;235(3):776-85.

Zic3 is critical for early embryonic patterning during gastrulation.

Ware SM(1), Harutyunyan KG, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.
stephanie.ware@cchmc.org

Mutations in the zinc finger transcription factor ZIC3 are associated with human 
left-right patterning abnormalities (X-linked heterotaxy, HTX1, MIM 306955), and 
mice null for Zic3 show a similar phenotype. However, the developmental function 
of Zic3 is largely unknown and its expression in early embryonic development
suggests a role prior to organ formation. The current study of Zic3 null mice
identifies a novel function for Zic3 in the gastrula-stage embryo. Analysis of
Zic3 function at early embryonic stages shows that it ensures the fidelity of
embryonic patterning, including patterning of the anterior visceral endoderm, the
initiation of gastrulation, and positioning of the primitive streak. At later
stages, deficiency of Zic3 results in abnormal mesoderm allocation. These results
indicate a requirement for Zic3 during early embryogenesis prior to cardiac and
visceral organ patterning.

PMID: 16397896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 18;102(42):15128-33. Epub 2005 Oct 7.

The Ca2+-induced methyltransferase xPRMT1b controls neural fate in amphibian
embryo.

Batut J(1), Vandel L, Leclerc C, Daguzan C, Moreau M, Néant I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, Groupment de Recherche 2688, Unite Mixte 
de Recherche 5547, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 118 Route de
Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 04, France.

We have previously shown that an increase in intracellular Ca2+ is both necessary
and sufficient to commit ectoderm to a neural fate in Xenopus embryos. However,
the relationship between this Ca2+ increase and the expression of early neural
genes has yet to be defined. Using a subtractive cDNA library between untreated
and caffeine-treated animal caps, i.e., control ectoderm and ectoderm induced
toward a neural fate by a release of Ca2+, we have isolated the arginine
N-methyltransferase, xPRMT1b, a Ca2+-induced target gene, which plays a pivotal
role in this process. First, we show in embryo and in animal cap that xPRMT1b
expression is Ca2+-regulated. Second, overexpression of xPRMT1b induces the
expression of early neural genes such as Zic3. Finally, in the whole embryo,
antisense approach with morpholino oligonucleotide against xPRMT1b impairs neural
development and in animal caps blocks the expression of neural markers induced by
a release of internal Ca2+. Our results implicate an instructive role of an
enzyme, an arginine methyltransferase protein, in the embryonic choice of
determination between epidermal and neural fate. The results presented provide
insights by which a Ca2+ increase induces neural fate.

PMCID: PMC1257693
PMID: 16214893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Clin Genet. 2005 Apr;67(4):290-6.

The ZIC gene family in development and disease.

Grinberg I(1), Millen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The human ZIC gene family is comprised of five members encoding zinc-finger
transcription factors, which are the vertebrate homologs of the Drosophila
odd-paired gene. Mutations in ZIC genes in humans have recently been implicated
in a wide variety of congenital malformations, including Dandy-Walker
malformation, holoprosencephaly, neural tube defects, and heterotaxy. Mutant
analysis of these genes in mice has underscored the conserved developmental roles
of these genes. Further, this analysis has begun to elucidate the molecular and
developmental mechanisms underlying these important birth defects.

PMID: 15733262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Exp Mol Med. 2004 Oct 31;36(5):468-75.

Transcriptional regulation of Zic3 by heterodimeric AP-1(c-Jun/c-Fos) during
Xenopus development.

Lee SY(1), Lee HS, Moon JS, Kim JI, Park JB, Lee JY, Park MJ, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon,
Kangwon-do 200-702, Korea.

The heterodimeric c-Jun/c-Fos, an activator protein-1 (AP-1) has been implicated 
in mesoderm induction (Dong et al., 1996; Kim et al., 1998) whereas the homodimer
of c-Jun was reported to be involved in neural inhibition during the early
development of Xenopus embryos. During the early vertebrate development AP-1
involvement in the neural induction is still not clearly understood. We report
here that AP-1 has a role in Zic3 expression, a critical proneural gene and a
primary regulator of neural and neural crest development (Nakata et al., 1997;
Nakata et al., 1998). AP-1 was able to induce the Zic3 gene in a dose dependent
manner but other homo- or hetero-dimeric proteins, such as c-Jun/c-Jun, JunD/FosB
or JunD/Fra-1 were not. The inhibition of AP-1 activity using morpholino
antisenses of c-jun mRNAs blocked the Zic3 expression induced by activin. In
addition, co-injection of c-jun mRNA rescued the down-regulated Zic3 expression. 
The promoter region of isolated Zic3 genomic DNA was found to possess several
consensus-binding site of AP-1. Thus, in the functional assays, AP-1 could
increase promoter activity of Zic3 gene. These findings suggest that proneural
gene, Zic3 may be regulated by heterodimeric AP-1(c-Jun/c-Fos) and it may have a 
role in activin signaling for the regulation of neural specific gene, Zic3.

PMID: 15557819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2004 Nov;70(11):880-4.

Further characterization of the genetic defect of the Bent tail mouse, a mouse
model for human neural tube defects.

Klootwijk R(1), Schijvenaars MM, Mariman EC, Franke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Neural tube defects (NTDs) are congenital malformations arising
mostly from incomplete neural tube closure during early embryogenesis. Most NTDs 
in humans have a complex etiology, with involvement of both genetic and
environmental factors. More than 100 mouse models for human neural tube defects
exist; Bent tail is one of them. The mouse mutant is caused by a submicroscopic
deletion on Xq that completely encompasses the Zic3 gene.
METHODS: We searched the ENSEMBL database for other genes/transcribed sequences
in the Bent tail deletion in addition to Zic3, which we confirmed by PCR
analysis.
RESULTS: In our study, we show that the Bent tail deletion is at least 300 kb in 
size, encompassing a processed pseudogene and a number of expressed sequence tags
in addition to Zic3. Although more research is needed to clarify the identity and
function of the deleted transcripts, most of them are expressed during embryonic 
development and might therefore contribute to the phenotype of the Bent tail
mouse.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents the first evidence for the fact that the Bent
tail allele is not merely a Zic3 knockout allele, as has been previously
suggested.

PMID: 15526289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Jan;13(1):34-40.

Situs ambiguus in a female fetus with balanced (X;21) translocation--evidence for
functional nullisomy of the ZIC3 gene?

Fritz B(1), Kunz J, Knudsen GP, Louwen F, Kennerknecht I, Eiben B, Orstavik KH,
Friedrich U, Rehder H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Genetik der Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.
fritzb@staff.uni-marburg.de

The human ZIC3 gene has been mapped to Xq26.2, the visceral heterotaxy locus
HTX1, and has been shown to be mutated in X-linked situs ambiguus and/or complex 
heart defects. We report on a female fetus with situs ambiguus, asplenia and
corrected transposition of the great arteries, displaying a (X;21) translocation.
The balanced state of the t(X;21)(q26;p13) was verified by FISH on metaphase
chromosomes of the fetus using DOP-PCR products of the microdissected der(21) and
Xq-subtelomere specific sequences, and by PRINS with beta-satellite specific
sequences. Examination with polymorphic markers flanking ZIC3 on DOP-PCR products
of the microdissected der(21) chromosome evidenced that the complete copy of the 
ZIC3 gene was translocated to chromosome 21. Mutations in the fetal and parental 
ZIC3 genes were excluded by sequencing. Paternal origin of the der(X) and der(21)
chromosomes was confirmed by use of polymorphic microsatellite markers from
chromosome 21 and from the chromosomal region Xq26, respectively. X chromosome
inactivation analysis using a PCR of a polymorphic (CAG)(n) repeat in the first
exon of the androgen receptor gene showed a completely skewed X inactivation
pattern with the paternal X as the active X chromosome, thus excluding functional
disomy of distal Xq. A positional effect caused by the balanced (X;21)
translocation may be responsible for functional nullisomy of ZIC3 and thus
explain the situs and cardiac abnormalities in the fetus.

PMID: 15470371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Nov 5;324(1):302-7.

Molecular properties of Zic4 and Zic5 proteins: functional diversity within Zic
family.

Ishiguro A(1), Inoue T, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The Zic-family proteins control various developmental processes. Previous studies
have shown that Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 can act as transcriptional regulators, and
that their functions are repressed by I-mfa, which has been identified as a
repressor for basic helix-loop-helix-type transcriptional factors. Here, we
investigated the molecular properties of the Zic4 and Zic5 proteins. Zic4/Zic5
showed DNA-binding activity to the Gli-binding sequence, similar to
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins. However, Zic4/Zic5 did not exhibit any significant
transcriptional activation ability nor they bind to I-mfa differently from
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3. The nuclear localization of Zic4/Zic5 was not affected by the
presence of the I-mfa protein, whereas the Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins were
translocated to the cytoplasmic compartment in the presence of I-mfa. The
difference may be attributable to the dissimilarity of the N-terminal region
between the Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 and Zic4/Zic5 proteins, since the binding of the
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins to I-mfa occurs through their N-terminal regions.

PMID: 15465018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Oct;20(8):2159-67.

Locomotor and oculomotor impairment associated with cerebellar dysgenesis in
Zic3-deficient (Bent tail) mutant mice.

Aruga J(1), Ogura H, Shutoh F, Ogawa M, Franke B, Nagao S, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.go.jp

We examined the adult neural phenotypes of the Bent tail mutant mouse. The Bent
tail mutant mouse was recently shown to lack a submicroscopic part of the X
chromosome containing the Zic3 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger protein
controlling vertebrate neural development. While nearly one-fourth of hemizygous 
Bent tail (Bn/Y, Zic3-deficient) mice developed neural tube defects in their
midbrain and hindbrain region, the other Bn/Y mice showed apparently normal
behaviour in a C57BL/6 genetic background. A battery of behavioural and eye
movement tests revealed impaired spontaneous locomotor activity, reduction of
muscle tone and impairments of vestibuloocular and optokinetic eye movements in
these mice. Morphological examination of the mutant brain showed a significant
reduction in the cell numbers in the cerebellar anterior lobe and
paraflocculus-flocculus complex. Our results indicate that the cerebellar
dysgenesis characterized by subregional hypoplasia affects the locomotor
activity, muscle tone and eye movement control of the mice. These findings may
have some clinical implications in relation to disorders characterized by
cerebellar dysgenesis, such as Joubert syndrome.

PMID: 15450095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Sep;4(5):505-11.

Overlapping and distinct expression domains of Zic2 and Zic3 during mouse
gastrulation.

Elms P(1), Scurry A, Davies J, Willoughby C, Hacker T, Bogani D, Arkell R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Early Development, Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell,
Oxfordshire OX11 0RD, UK.

The Zic genes are the vertebrate homologues of the Drosophila Odd-paired gene.
Mutations in two of these genes are associated with human congenital genetic
disorders. Mutation of human and mouse Zic2 is associated with holoprosencephaly 
which is caused by a defect of ventral forebrain development and mutation of
human and mouse Zic3 is associated with a X-linked heterotaxy syndrome that
results from a failure of left-right axis formation. The embryological role of
the Zic genes in these disorders is not well understood. Here we show that both
of these genes are expressed prior to and throughout gastrulation. The genes show
some broad similarities in their expression domains. Both genes however are also 
uniquely expressed in some tissues and these unique domains correlate with
regions that potentially play a role in the aetiology of the respective genetic
disorders. During primitive streak stages Zic2 is expressed transiently and
uniquely in the node and the head process mesendoderm. The head process is known 
to be required for the establishment or maintenance of the ventral forebrain,
which is the region disrupted in holoprosencephaly. Zic3 is not expressed in the 
node during primitive streak stages but is expressed in and around the node
beginning from the head fold stages of development. This expression of Zic3
correlates well with the first steps in the establishment of the left-right axis.
We also examined the expression of the closely related gene, Zic1, and did not
detect any transcripts in gastrulation stage embryos.

PMID: 15261827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2004 May;19(3):216-20.

Molecular genetics of heterotaxy syndromes.

Belmont JW(1), Mohapatra B, Towbin JA, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. jbelmont@bcm.tmc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Heterotaxy is a complex set of birth defects in which the
normal concordance of asymmetric thoracic and abdominal organs is disturbed. In
this review the authors summarize recent research on the etiology of heterotaxy
syndromes. Improved understanding of the genetic control of left-right patterning
in the early embryo is leading to the identification of candidate genes that may 
be mutated in heterotaxy patients, and epidemiologic studies are helping to
define nongenetic mechanisms of embryopathy.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several genes have now been implicated in heterotaxy and related
isolated congenital heart malformations. These studies indicate that heterotaxy
can be caused by single gene mutations. They also demonstrate that there is
probably extensive locus heterogeneity. Heterotaxy may be caused by teratogenic
exposures, especially maternal diabetes. Isolated congenital heart defects
resulting from isomerisms and disturbed looping may be caused by mutations in
genes that control early left-right patterning and the earliest steps in
cardiogenesis. Genes currently implicated in human heterotaxy include ZIC3,
LEFTYA, CRYPTIC, and ACVR2B. Roles for NKX2.5 and CRELDA are suggested by recent 
case reports.
SUMMARY: Active research on the etiology of heterotaxy is leading to a
reformulation of the likely etiologies. Its complex inheritance likely results
from a mix of teratogenic and single gene disorders with variable expression and 
incomplete penetrance.

PMID: 15096953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Development. 2004 Apr;131(7):1553-62. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Disruption of gradient expression of Zic3 resulted in abnormal intra-retinal axon
projection.

Zhang J(1), Jin Z, Bao ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The targeting of retinal ganglion axons toward the optic disc is the first step
in axon pathfinding in the visual system. The molecular mechanisms involved in
guiding the retinal axons to project towards the optic disc are not well
understood. We report that a gene encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor,
Zic3, is expressed in a periphery-high and center-low gradient in the retina at
the stages of active axon extension inside the retina. The gradient expression of
Zic3 recedes towards the periphery over the course of development, correlating
with the progression of retinal cell differentiation and axonogenesis. Disruption
of gradient expression of Zic3 by retroviral overexpression resulted in
mis-targeting of retinal axons and some axons misrouted to the sub-retinal space 
at the photoreceptor side of the retina. Misexpression of Zic3 did not affect
neurogenesis or differentiation inside the retina, or grossly alter retinal
lamination. By stripe assay, we show that misexpression of Zic3 may induce the
expression of an inhibitory factor to the retinal axons. Zic3 appears to play a
role in intra-retinal axon targeting, possibly through regulation of the
expression of specific downstream genes involved in axon guidance.

PMID: 14985256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2003 Dec;67(12):979-84.

Phenotype of the neural tube defect mouse model bent tail is not sensitive to
maternal folinic acid, myo-inositol, or zinc supplementation.

Franke B(1), Klootwijk R, Lemmers B, de Kovel CG, Steegers-Theunissen RP, Mariman
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands. b.franke@antrg.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Bent tail is a mouse model for X-linked neural tube defects (NTDs)
that is characterized by the presence of exencephaly, a delayed posterior
neuropore closure, and a tail phenotype. In addition, Bent tail shows laterality 
defects and increased prenatal mortality. The congenital malformations of this
mouse are caused by a submicroscopic deletion that completely encompasses the
gene coding for the zinc finger transcription factor Zic3. In this study we
investigated the sensitivity of the phenotype of Bent tail to the nutrients
folinic acid, myo-inositol, and zinc. These nutrients are thought to be involved 
in the etiology of NTDs, in combination with a genetic predisposition.
METHODS: The most penetrant phenotype of the Bent tail mouse, the tail
malformation, was used as a marker for the nutrient sensitivity of the neural
phenotype. The size of the litters and the survival of the offspring, subdivided 
according to genotype, were analyzed as markers for the nutrient sensitivity of
other phenotypic features of Bent tail.
RESULTS: In confirmation of earlier studies, we observed the prenatal loss of a
number of homozygous females and hemizygous males, as well as the effect of
genotype on the tail phenotype of Bent tail. However, periconceptional
supplementation of the maternal diet with folinic acid, myo-inositol, or zinc
produced no significant effects on either the tail phenotype of the offspring or 
the size and genotypic composition of the litters.
CONCLUSIONS: Bent tail appears to be a folinic acid-, myo-inositol-, and
zinc-insensitive mouse model for NTDs.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14745918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jan;74(1):93-105. Epub 2003 Dec 16.

Identification and functional analysis of ZIC3 mutations in heterotaxy and
related congenital heart defects.

Ware SM(1), Peng J, Zhu L, Fernbach S, Colicos S, Casey B, Towbin J, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mutations in the zinc finger transcription factor ZIC3 cause X-linked heterotaxy 
and have also been identified in patients with isolated congenital heart disease 
(CHD). To determine the relative contribution of ZIC3 mutations to both
heterotaxy and isolated CHD, we screened the coding region of ZIC3 in 194
unrelated patients, including 61 patients with classic heterotaxy, 93 patients
with heart defects characteristic of heterotaxy, and 11 patients with situs
inversus totalis. Five novel ZIC3 mutations in three classic heterotaxy kindreds 
and two sporadic CHD cases were identified. None of these alleles was found in 97
ethnically matched control samples. On the basis of these analyses, we conclude
that the phenotypic spectrum of ZIC3 mutations should be expanded to include
affected females and CHD not typical for heterotaxy. This screening of a cohort
of patients with sporadic heterotaxy indicates that ZIC3 mutations account for
approximately 1% of affected individuals. Missense and nonsense mutations were
found in the highly conserved zinc finger-binding domain and in the N-terminal
protein domain. Functional analysis of all currently known ZIC3 point mutations
indicates that mutations in the putative zinc finger DNA binding domain and in
the N-terminal domain result in loss of reporter gene transactivation. It is
surprising that transfection studies demonstrate aberrant cytoplasmic
localization resulting from mutations between amino acids 253-323 of the ZIC3
protein, indicating that the pathogenesis of a subset of ZIC3 mutations results
at least in part from failure of appropriate nuclear localization. These results 
further expand the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of ZIC3 mutations and
provide initial mechanistic insight into their functional consequences.

PMCID: PMC1181916
PMID: 14681828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 1;124A(1):40-7.

Genetic variants in ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC3 are not major risk factors for neural
tube defects in humans.

Klootwijk R(1), Groenen P, Schijvenaars M, Hol F, Hamel B, Straatman H,
Steegers-Theunissen R, Mariman E, Franke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, 6500 HB
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Neural tube defects (NTD) are congenital malformations arising from incomplete
neural tube closure during early embryogenesis. Most NTD in humans show complex
inheritance patterns, with both genetic and environmental factors involved in the
etiology of this malformation. More than 120 mouse models for human NTD exist.
NTD have been observed in mice deficient for the Zic family genes, Zic1, Zic2,
and Zic3. We performed mutation analysis in the human orthologs of these genes
using DNA material from a large panel of NTD patients. In ZIC2 we identified a
deletion of one codon that encodes an alanine residue located in the amino
terminal alanine stretch of the protein. The deletion was present in one patient,
but not in 364 controls. That may suggest a role-albeit small-of this variant in 
the etiology of NTD in humans. Transmission disequilibrium testing of a frequent 
polymorphism in the ZIC2 gene (1059C > T, H353H) in parent-spina bifida aperta
child triads showed no association with NTD. One silent polymorphism (858G > A,
V286V) of unknown significance was identified in ZIC3. Neither mutations nor
polymorphisms were found in the coding region or flanking sequences of ZIC1. Our 
data indicate that ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC3 are not major risk factors for NTD in
humans.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14679585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2003 Oct;207(3):255-62. Epub 2003 Oct 2.

Analysis of the embryonic phenotype of Bent tail, a mouse model for X-linked
neural tube defects.

Franke B(1), Klootwijk R, Hekking JW, de Boer RT, ten Donkelaar HJ, Mariman EC,
van Straaten HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands. b.franke@antrg.umcn.nl

Neural tube defects, mostly believed to result from closure defects of the neural
tube during embryonic development, are frequently observed congenital
malformations in humans. Since the etiology of these defects is not well
understood yet, many animal models for neural tube defects, either arising from
spontaneous mutations or generated by gene targeting, are being studied. The Bent
tail mouse is a model for X-linked neural tube defects. This mutant has a
characteristic short and kinked tail. Exencephaly occurs in Bent tail embryos
with a frequency of 11-16%. Laterality defects also belong to the phenotypic
spectrum. In this study, we analyzed the embryonic phenotype in further detail
using scanning electron microscopy during the stages of neurulation. We observed 
a number of defects in both wild type and Bent tail embryos, including a kinked
neural tube, tight amnion, delay in axial rotation and even malrotation. The
severity or frequency of most defects, the delay in axial rotation excluded, was 
significantly higher in Bent tail embryos compared to wild type embryos. Other
abnormalities were seen in Bent tail embryos only. These defects were related to 
anterior and posterior neural tube closure and resulted in exencephaly and a
closure delay of the posterior neuropore, respectively. The exencephalic
phenotype was further analyzed by light microscopy in ED14 embryos, showing
disorganization and overgrowth in the mesencephalon and rhombencephalon. In
conclusion, the anterior and posterior neural tube closure defects in the Bent
tail are strictly linked to the genetic defect in this mouse. Other phenotypic
features described in this study also occur in the wild type genetic background
of the Bent tail strain. Apparently, the genetic background contains elements
conducive to these developmental abnormalities.

PMID: 14523648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 15;261(2):381-90.

Calcium transients triggered by planar signals induce the expression of ZIC3 gene
during neural induction in Xenopus.

Leclerc C(1), Lee M, Webb SE, Moreau M, Miller AL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547, Université Paul Sabatier, 118
Route de Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse, 04, CEDEX, France.

In intact Xenopus embryos, an increase in intracellular Ca(2+) in the dorsal
ectoderm is both necessary and sufficient to commit the ectoderm to a neural
fate. However, the relationship between this Ca(2+) increase and the expression
of early neural genes is as yet unknown. In intact embryos, studying the
interaction between Ca(2+) signaling and gene expression during neural induction 
is complicated by the fact that the dorsal ectoderm receives both planar and
vertical signals from the mesoderm. The experimental system may be simplified by 
using Keller open-face explants where vertical signals are eliminated, thus
allowing the interaction between planar signals, Ca(2+) transients, and neural
induction to be explored. We have imaged Ca(2+) dynamics during neural induction 
in open-face explants by using aequorin. Planar signals generated by the mesoderm
induced localized Ca(2+) transients in groups of cells in the ectoderm. These
transients resulted from the activation of L-type Ca(2+) channels. The
accumulated Ca(2+) pattern correlated with the expression of the early neural
precursor gene, Zic3. When the transients were blocked with pharmacological
agents, the level of Zic3 expression was dramatically reduced. These data
indicate that, in open-face explants, planar signals reproduce Ca(2+) -signaling 
patterns similar to those observed in the dorsal ectoderm of intact embryos and
that the accumulated effect of the localized Ca(2+) transients over time may play
a role in controlling the expression pattern of Zic3.

PMID: 14499648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mech Dev. 2003 Aug;120(8):955-64.

Identification of a phylogenetically conserved activin-responsive enhancer in the
Zic3 gene.

Weber JR(1), Sokol SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School and 
Molecular Medicine Unit, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Multiple signaling pathways are involved in the induction of the organizer, a
major center controlling vertebrate body plan formation. To study these signals, 
we have focused on the regulation of the Zic3 gene, which codes for a zinc finger
transcription factor expressed in the organizer region at the beginning of
gastrulation. We searched for DNA regulatory elements in the Zic3 promoter by
testing their ability to drive reporter gene expression in early embryos. By this
approach, we identified an activin responsive enhancer (Zic3-ARE), which was
located in the Zic3 first intron and was essential for dorsal activation of the
reporter. The Zic3-ARE was stimulated by activin and Nodal ligands, but not by a 
dominant negative bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor. The Zic3-ARE
contains a repeating consensus homeodomain binding sequence, CTAATTAAA,
suggesting involvement of a homeodomain transcription factor(s). Mutations in
this motif abolished enhancer activity in dorsal marginal zone and its response
to activin in animal pole explants. Inhibition of either Wnt/beta-catenin or
activin/Nodal signaling suppressed Zic3-ARE activity in dorsal blastomeres,
further illustrating the importance of these pathways in activation of organizer 
genes.

PMID: 12963115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2002;99(1-4):229-35.

The role of ZIC3 in vertebrate development.

Herman GE(1), El-Hodiri HM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Human Genetics, Columbus Children's Research
Institute and Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43205, USA. hermang@pediatrics.ohio-state.edu

ZIC3 is a C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor that is involved in early
patterning of the vertebrate embryo. Human patients with mutations in the
X-linked ZIC3 gene have a complex developmental phenotype that includes
laterality defects, congenital heart disease, and lumbosacral and anal anomalies,
including neural tube defects. Similar phenotypes are found in the bent tail (BN)
mouse, a spontaneous mutation that is associated with a submicroscopic deletion
of the ZIC3 locus, as well as in a ZIC3 null allele generated through homologous 
recombination. These findings suggest that ZIC3 plays important roles during
development in establishing a proper left-right axis and in midline neural
patterning. This review will summarize our current understanding of the role of
ZIC3 in patterning of the vertebrate embryo, based on studies in model organisms 
such as Xenopus and the mouse. In addition, a comparison of ZIC3 with other
vertebrate ZIC family members will be provided.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12900569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Rev Port Cardiol. 2003 Jan;22(1):91-104.

A case of complete situs inversus.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Marta MJ(1), Falcão LM, Saavedra JA, Ravara L.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Medicina I, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa.

Complete situs inversus is a rare syndrome, with overall frequency estimated at
1/10,000 births, resulting from abnormal rotation of the cardiac tube during
embryogenesis, of unknown mechanism. Recent studies suggest that left-right
asymmetry defects are likely to be due to genetic abnormalities in the lefty,
nodal, i.v., HAND, ZIC3, Shh, ACVR2B and/or Pitxz genes. In dextrocardia with
situs inversus the heart is structurally normal in 90-95% of cases, in contrast
to dextroversion (dextrocardia with situs solitus), which has a high incidence of
structural cardiac defects. Atrial septal defect is one of the most common
congenital cardiac anomalies in adults. Diagnosis is based on clinical
manifestations and simple complementary diagnostic exams like abdominal and
thoracic radiography and electrocardiogram. Prognosis in isolated dextrocardia
depends on the congenital cardiac defects present. By contrast, in dextrocardia
with situs inversus life expectancy is similar to that of the general population.
The authors present the case of a 64-year-old German man admitted to the
emergency care unit with a diagnosis of embolic stroke due to atrial fibrillation
with fast ventricular rate. As clinical history could not be assessed due to
language limitations, routine admission tests were performed. They revealed
complete situs inversus with corrected ostium secundum atrial septal defect.
Finally, the anatomic, pathologic, embryologic and etiologic features of complete
situs inversus and related abnormalities of the cardiac structures are presented.
Special emphasis is given to genetic abnormalities, the study of which has seen
great advances since the 1990s thanks to new techniques of DNA analysis.

PMID: 12712813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2003 May;130(10):2071-81.

FRL-1, a member of the EGF-CFC family, is essential for neural differentiation in
Xenopus early development.

Yabe S(1), Tanegashima K, Haramoto Y, Takahashi S, Fujii T, Kozuma S, Taketani Y,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Recent studies indicate an essential role for the EGF-CFC family in vertebrate
development, particularly in the regulation of nodal signaling. Biochemical
evidence suggests that EGF-CFC genes can also activate certain cellular responses
independently of nodal signaling. Here, we show that FRL-1, a Xenopus EGF-CFC
gene, suppresses BMP signaling to regulate an early step in neural induction.
Overexpression of FRL-1 in animal caps induced the early neural markers zic3,
soxD and Xngnr-1, but not the pan-mesodermal marker Xbra or the dorsal mesodermal
marker chordin. Furthermore, overexpression of FRL-1 suppressed the expression of
the BMP-responsive genes, Xvent-1 and Xmsx-1, which are expressed in animal caps 
and induced by overexpressed BMP-4. Conversely, loss of function analysis using
morpholino-antisense oligonucleotides against FRL-1 (FRL-1MO) showed that FRL-1
is required for neural development. FRL-1MO-injected embryos lacked neural
structures but contained mesodermal tissue. It was suggested previously that
expression of early neural genes that mark the start of neuralization is
activated in the presumptive neuroectoderm of gastrulae. FRL-1MO also inhibited
the expression of these genes in dorsal ectoderm, but did not affect the
expression of chordin, which acts as a neural inducer from dorsal mesoderm.
FRL-1MO also inhibited the expression of neural markers that were induced by
chordin in animal caps, suggesting that FRL-1 enables the response to neural
inducing signals in ectoderm. Furthermore, we showed that the activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase by FRL-1 is required for neural induction and
BMP inhibition. Together, these results suggest that FRL-1 is essential in the
establishment of the neural induction response.

PMID: 12668622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Dyn. 2003 Apr;226(4):702-12.

Expression of ZIC genes in the development of the chick inner ear and nervous
system.

Warner SJ(1), Hutson MR, Oh SH, Gerlach-Bank LM, Lomax MI, Barald KF.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology/Head-Neck
Surgery, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

ZIC genes, vertebrate homologues of the Drosophila pair-rule gene odd-paired
(opa), function in embryonic pattern formation, in the early stages of central
nervous system neurogenesis and in cerebellar maturation. Mouse Zic genes are
expressed in restricted, and in some cases overlapping, patterns during
development, particularly in the central and peripheral nervous systems. We
identified chick ZIC2 in a differential display analysis of the auditory system
designed to find genes up-regulated after noise trauma. In this study, we
examined the expression of chick ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC3 by in situ hybridization in
normal inner ear development and in the tissues that influence its development,
including the hindbrain, the neural crest, and the periotic mesenchyme. Between
Hamburger and Hamilton stages 13 and 24, all three ZIC genes were found in the
dorsal periotic mesenchyme adjacent to the developing inner ear. ZIC1 mRNA was
expressed in the otocyst epithelium between stages 12 and 24, in some sensory
tissue, as well as in a striped pattern in the floorplate of the hindbrain that
appears to be complementary to that of Chordin, a gene known to regulate ZIC
expression in frogs. Chick ZIC genes are also expressed in the neuroectoderm,
paraxial mesenchyme, brain, spinal cord, neural crest, and/or the overlying
ectoderm as well as the limb buds. In general, ZIC1 and ZIC2 expression patterns 
overlapped, although ZIC2 expression was less robust; ZIC3 expression was
minimal. These observations suggest that ZIC genes, in addition to their known
roles in brain development, may play an important role in the development of the 
chick inner ear.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12666207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Feb 1;116A(4):414-5.

Lack of association between ZIC2 and ZIC3 genes and the risk of neural tube
defects (NTDs) in Hispanic populations.

Zhu H, Junker WM, Finnell RH, Brown S, Shaw GM, Lammer EJ, Canfield M, Hendricks 
K.

PMID: 12522805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2293-302.

A complex syndrome of left-right axis, central nervous system and axial skeleton 
defects in Zic3 mutant mice.

Purandare SM(1), Ware SM, Kwan KM, Gebbia M, Bassi MT, Deng JM, Vogel H,
Behringer RR, Belmont JW, Casey B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

X-linked heterotaxy (HTX1) is a rare developmental disorder characterized by
disturbances in embryonic laterality and other midline developmental field
defects. HTX1 results from mutations in ZIC3, a member of the GLI transcription
factor superfamily. A targeted deletion of the murine Zic3 locus has been created
to investigate its function and interactions with other molecular components of
the left-right axis pathway. Embryonic lethality is seen in approximately 50% of 
null mice with an additional 30% lethality in the perinatal period. Null embryos 
have defects in turning, cardiac development and neural tube closure.
Malformations in live born null mice include complex congenital heart defects,
pulmonary reversal or isomerism, CNS defects and vertebral/rib anomalies.
Investigation of nodal expression in Zic3-deficient mice indicates that, although
nodal is initially expressed symmetrically in the node, there is failure to
maintain expression and to shift to asymmetric expression. Subsequent nodal and
Pitx2 expression in the lateral plate mesoderm in these mice is randomized,
indicating that Zic3 acts upstream of these genes in the determination of
left-right asymmetry. The phenotype of these mice correctly models the defects
found in human HTX1 and indicates an important role for Zic3 in both left-right
and axial patterning.

PMID: 11959836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Hum Genet. 2002 Feb;110(2):157-65. Epub 2001 Dec 18.

Identification, genomic organization, chromosomal mapping and mutation analysis
of the human INV gene, the ortholog of a murine gene implicated in left-right
axis development and biliary atresia.

Schön P(1), Tsuchiya K, Lenoir D, Mochizuki T, Guichard C, Takai S, Maiti AK,
Nihei H, Weil J, Yokoyama T, Bouvagnet P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, EA 3088, Faculté de Médecine
Pharmacie, Université C. Bernard Lyon 1, France.

Determination of left-right axis is a precocious embryonic event, and all
phenotypic anomalies resulting from disruption of the normal lateralization
process are collectively referred to as the lateralization defect. A transgenic
mouse with lateralization defect and hepatic, kidney, and pancreatic anomalies
has resulted from disruption of the inv gene by insertion of a transgene. The
human ortholog is thus a good candidate for lateralization defect in humans, in
particular in cases with associated hepatic anomalies. Here, we have identified, 
mapped, and characterized the INV human gene and screened a series of heterotaxic
patients (with or without biliary anomalies) for mutation in this gene. In a
German family of Turkish origin, we have found that all available affected and
unaffected individuals are heterozygous for a mutation in the splicing donor site
of intron 12 in the INV gene resulting in two different aberrant splicing
isoforms. This can be explained either by a randomization of lateralization
defects or, as suggested earlier, di- or trigenic inheritance, although we have
been unable to detect, in this family, a mutation in genes known to be involved
in the human lateralization defect ( LEFTY1, LEFTY2, ACVR2B, NODAL, ZIC3, and
CFC1). In contrast to the mouse, the affected individuals have no biliary
anomalies, and the absence of mutation in a series of seven cases with
lateralization defect and biliary anomalies demonstrates that INV is not
frequently involved in such a phenotype in humans.

PMID: 11935322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Growth Differ. 2002 Feb;44(1):55-61.

Xenopus Brachyury regulates mesodermal expression of Zic3, a gene controlling
left-right asymmetry.

Kitaguchi T(1), Mizugishi K, Hatayama M, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, Riken Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The Brachyury gene has a critical role in the formation of posterior mesoderm and
notochord in vertebrate development. A recent study showed that Brachyury is also
responsible for the formation of the left-right (L-R) axis in mouse and
zebrafish. However, the role of Brachyury in L-R axis specification is still
elusive. Here, it is demonstrated that Brachyury is involved in L-R specification
of the Xenopus laevis embryo and regulates expression of Zic3, which controls the
L-R specification process. Overexpression of Xenopus Brachyury (Xbra) and
dominant-negative type Xbra (Xbra-EnR) altered the orientation of heart and gut
looping, concomitant with disturbed laterality of nodal-related 1 (Xnr1) and
Pitx2 expression, both of which are normally expressed in the left lateral plate 
mesoderm. Furthermore, activation of inducible type Xbra (Xbra-GR) induces Zic3
expression within 20 min. These results suggest that a role of Brachyury in L-R
specification may be the direct regulation of Zic3 expression.

PMID: 11869292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Dyn. 2001 Dec;222(4):688-93.

zic Gene expression marks anteroposterior pattern in the presumptive neurectoderm
of the zebrafish gastrula.

Grinblat Y(1), Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Anteroposterior (A/P) patterning of the vertebrate neurectoderm begins early
during development. In vitro explant assays have been used to show that an A/P
subdivision of the zebrafish neurectoderm is in place by early gastrulation.
However, no direct markers of this subdivision had been described. We report
isolation of two members of the zic gene family, zic2 and zic3, which mark
distinct regions in the developing nervous system. zic3 is expressed in early
gastrula embryos in a posterior domain, directly demonstrating that A/P pattern
is present in the future neurectoderm by this stage. Analysis of mutants in genes
encoding bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) shows that dorsal restriction of zic3
expression requires intact BMP function, and that posterior restriction of zic3
expression is regulated independently of BMP signaling. These data show an early 
subdivision of the A/P axis in the presumptive neurectoderm.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11748837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Jul 15;101(4):356-8.

Genetics of human situs abnormalities.

Casey B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children's
Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. bcasey@bcm.tmc.edu

Human left-right malformations are usually sporadic, but many familial cases have
been described. Recognition of these families as well as sporadic cases with
underlying cytogenetic abnormalities suggest genetic predisposition for many
instances of situs malformations. Studies in nonhuman vertebrates have led to the
discovery of several genes conserved in normal left-right development, and
mutations in some of these have been identified in humans. In addition,
positional cloning efforts have yielded some success in enlarging our
understanding of the molecular genetics of human left-right anomalies.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11471159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Dev Genes Evol. 2001 Jun;211(6):309-14.

Xenopus Polycomblike 2 (XPcl2) controls anterior to posterior patterning of the
neural tissue.

Kitaguchi T(1), Nakata K, Nagai T, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

A novel gene, Xenopus Polycomblike 2 (XPcl2), which encodes a protein similar to 
Drosophila Polycomblike was cloned and characterized. Polycomblike belongs to the
Polycomb group proteins, which maintain stable expression patterns for the
clustered homeotic genes in the Drosophila embryo by forming multimeric complexes
on chromatin. XPcl2 shows greater amino acid sequence homology to human and mouse
M96 (hPcl2, mPcl2) than Xenopus Pcl1 (XPcl1), mouse Tctex3 (mPcl1) and human PHF1
(hPcl1), indicating that at least two types of Polycomblike genes are conserved
between amphibians and mammals. XPcl2 mRNA is present both maternally and
zygotically, and the temporal expression profile is distinct from XPcl1, another 
member of the Polycomblike family in Xenopus. XPcl2 is highly expressed in the
anterior-dorsal region of Xenopus following the neurula stage in a manner similar
to XPcl1. Overexpression of XPcl2 disturbs the development of the anterior
central nervous system, eye and cement gland. In the XPcl2-overexpressing embryo,
a hindbrain marker, Krox20, and a spinal cord marker, HoxB9, are expressed more
posteriorly, suggesting an alteration in the anterior-posterior patterning of the
neural tissue. In addition, XPcl2 represses Zic3- and noggin-induced anterior
neural markers, but not neural crest markers in animal cap explants. These
results indicate that XPcl2 regulates anterior neural tissue development and the 
anterior-posterior patterning of the neural tissue.

PMID: 11466526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Winter;97(4):258-70.

Of mice and men: dissecting the genetic pathway that controls left-right
asymmetry in mice and humans.

Schneider H(1), Brueckner M.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The increasing ability to manipulate the mouse genetically has created a model
system that is both accessible and an accurate mirror of human development. A
combination of analysis of existing spontaneous mouse mutations and creation of
targeted mutations has identified at least z24 genes involved in the
specification of mouse left-right asymmetry. These genes function in a carefully 
orchestrated manner first to create asymmetry at the node, then to signal it to
the immediately surrounding cells via the node monocilia, and finally to amplify 
the initial asymmetry and propagate it to the developing organs. Defects at
different steps in this pathway result in differences in the final phenotype.
Human homologues exist for most of the mouse left-right determining genes.
Notably, when human mutations in these genes have been identified in patients
with defects of laterality determination, the human phenotype correlates very
closely with the corresponding mouse phenotype.

PMID: 11376437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Teratology. 2001 Mar;63(3):119-26.

Mutation analysis of left-right axis determining genes in NOD and ICR, strains
susceptible to maternal diabetes.

Maeyama K(1), Kosaki R, Yoshihashi H, Casey B, Kosaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Genetic background of the fetus contributes to the pathogenesis of
congenital malformation after teratogen exposure. Such contribution is
illustrated in left-right axis malformations observed in the F1 offspring of
nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse dams and sires from different strains. When sires
of the NOD, ICR, or C57BL/6J were mated with NOD dams, incidence varied depending
on the fetal genotype, with 65% in NOD x NOD, 24% in NOD x ICR, and 7% in NOD x
C57BL/6J.
METHODS: As a first step in elucidating the molecular basis of the interstrain
differences in susceptibility to situs defects, we compared genomic sequences of 
six genes HNF3beta, Acvr2b, Nodal, ZIC3, Lefty1, and Smad2, which are involved in
the normal development of left-right axis among NOD, ICR, and C57BL/6J strains.
RESULTS: The outbred strain ICR had 1) a 0.2-kb insertion in the putative
promoter region of the isoform E of HNF3beta together with a G to A change that
could create a potential splice acceptor in the exon 3 of HNF3beta (gene
frequency P = 0.36), 2) five single base substitutions within the 5' controlling 
element and a proline to serine substitution (P2S) of Lefty1 (P = 0.77), and 3) a
tyrosine to histidine substitution within the prodomain of Nodal (P = 0.48). The 
inbred strain NOD had the same G to A change as ICR and a three-base deletion in 
the putative promoter of isoform E of HNF3beta.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that sequence variations in HNF3beta, Lefty1, and Nodal
might account, in part, for the interstrain differences in susceptibility to
situs abnormalities among the offspring of diabetic dams.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11283968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):6889-92. Epub 2001 Jan 12.

Physical and functional interactions between Zic and Gli proteins.

Koyabu Y(1), Nakata K, Mizugishi K, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic and Gli family proteins are transcription factors that share similar zinc
finger domains. Recent studies indicate that Zic and Gli collaborate in neural
and skeletal development. We provide evidence that the Zic and Gli proteins
physically and functionally interact through their zinc finger domains. Moreover,
Gli proteins were translocated to cell nuclei by coexpressed Zic proteins, and
both proteins regulated each other's transcriptional activity. Our result
suggests that the physical interaction between Zic and Gli is the molecular basis
of their antagonistic or synergistic features in developmental contexts and that 
Zic proteins are potential modulators of the hedgehog-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 11238441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Jan 22;98(3):283-5.

Lack of mutations in ZIC3 in three families with neural tube defects.

Carrel T, Herman GE, Moore GE, Stanier P.

PMID: 11169570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):123-5.

Expression of a novel mouse gene 'mbFZb' in distinct regions of the developing
nervous system and the adult brain.

Vetter K(1), Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstrasse 2-10, 80804 Munich,
Germany.

Using an induction gene trap approach with bFGF, we identified a novel mouse gene
mbFZb (mouse basic FGF repressed, putative Zic binding protein). It shows high
homology to a putative Zic3 binding protein in Xenopus (AF129131). We used the in
situ hybridization technique on sections to analyze the expression pattern of
mbFZb during embryonic development in the mouse. From E9.5 onwards it is
expressed mainly in the developing nervous system, with high levels of expression
in the proliferating neuroepithel of the brain and the neural tube, the ganglia
of the cranial nerves V, VII, VIII, IX and X and the dorsal root ganglia.
MbFZbtranscript can also be detected in the developing eye and the brown fat. In 
the adult brain strong expression is restricted to the olfactory bulb, the
hippocampus, the piriform cortex and the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. On the
cellular level the mbFZb/GFP fusion protein is localized in vesicular structures 
in the cytoplasm.

PMID: 11118897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Genet. 2000 Nov;26(3):365-9.

Loss-of-function mutations in the EGF-CFC gene CFC1 are associated with human
left-right laterality defects.

Bamford RN(1), Roessler E, Burdine RD, Saplakoglu U, dela Cruz J, Splitt M,
Goodship JA, Towbin J, Bowers P, Ferrero GB, Marino B, Schier AF, Shen MM, Muenke
M, Casey B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 2000 Dec;26(4):501.

All vertebrates display a characteristic asymmetry of internal organs with the
cardiac apex, stomach and spleen towards the left, and the liver and gall bladder
on the right. Left-right (L-R) axis abnormalities or laterality defects are
common in humans (1 in 8,500 live births). Several genes (such as Nodal, Ebaf and
Pitx2) have been implicated in L-R organ positioning in model organisms. In
humans, relatively few genes have been associated with a small percentage of
human situs defects. These include ZIC3 (ref. 5), LEFTB (formerly LEFTY2; ref. 6)
and ACVR2B (encoding activin receptor IIB; ref. 7). The EGF-CFC genes, mouse Cfc1
(encoding the Cryptic protein; ref. 9) and zebrafish one-eyed pinhead (oep; refs 
10, 11) are essential for the establishment of the L-R axis. EGF-CFC proteins act
as co-factors for Nodal-related signals, which have also been implicated in L-R
axis development. Here we identify loss-of-function mutations in human CFC1
(encoding the CRYPTIC protein) in patients with heterotaxic phenotypes
(randomized organ positioning). The mutant proteins have aberrant cellular
localization in transfected cells and are functionally defective in a zebrafish
oep-mutant rescue assay. Our findings indicate that the essential role of EGF-CFC
genes and Nodal signalling in left-right axis formation is conserved from fish to
humans. Moreover, our results support a role for environmental and/or genetic
modifiers in determining the ultimate phenotype in humans.

PMID: 11062482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):2180-8. Epub 2000 Oct 26.

Molecular properties of Zic proteins as transcriptional regulators and their
relationship to GLI proteins.

Mizugishi K(1), Aruga J, Nakata K, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic family genes encode zinc finger proteins, which play important roles in
vertebrate development. The zinc finger domains are highly conserved between Zic 
proteins and show a notable homology to those of Gli family proteins. In this
study, we investigated the functional properties of Zic proteins and their
relationship to the GLI proteins. We first established an optimal binding
sequence for Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 proteins by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay-based target selection and mutational analysis. The selected sequence was
almost identical to the GLI binding sequence. However, the binding affinity was
lower than that of GLI. Consistent results were obtained in reporter assays, in
which transcriptional activation by Zic proteins was less dependent on the GLI
binding sequence than GLI1. Moreover, Zic proteins activated a wide range of
promoters irrespective of the presence of a GLI binding sequence. When Zic and
GLI proteins were cotransfected into cultured cells, Zic proteins enhanced or
suppressed sequence-dependent, GLI-mediated transactivation depending on cell
type. Taken together, these results suggest that Zic proteins may act as
transcriptional coactivators and that their function may be modulated by the GLI 
proteins and possibly by other cell type-specific cofactors.

PMID: 11053430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Development. 2000 Nov;127(22):4787-95.

Zic3 is involved in the left-right specification of the Xenopus embryo.

Kitaguchi T(1), Nagai T, Nakata K, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jp.

Establishment of left-right (L-R) asymmetry is fundamental to vertebrate
development. Several genes involved in L-R asymmetry have been described. In the 
Xenopus embryo, Vg1/activin signals are implicated upstream of asymmetric nodal
related 1 (Xnr1) and Pitx2 expression in L-R patterning. We report here that Zic3
carries the left-sided signal from the initial activin-like signal to
determinative factors such as Pitx2. Overexpression of Zic3 on the right side of 
the embryo altered the orientation of heart and gut looping, concomitant with
disturbed laterality of expression of Xnr1 and Pitx2, both of which are normally 
expressed in the left lateral plate mesoderm. The results indicate that Zic3
participates in the left-sided signaling upstream of Xnr1 and Pitx2. At early
gastrula, Zic3 was expressed not only in presumptive neuroectoderm but also in
mesoderm. Correspondingly, overexpression of Zic3 was effective in the L-R
specification at the early gastrula stage, as revealed by a hormone-inducible
Zic3 construct. The Zic3 expression in the mesoderm is induced by activin (beta) 
or Vg1, which are also involved in the left-sided signal in L-R specification.
These findings suggest that an activin-like signal is a potent upstream activator
of Zic3 that establishes the L-R axis. Furthermore, overexpression of the
zinc-finger domain of Zic3 on the right side is sufficient to disturb the L-R
axis, while overexpression of the N-terminal domain on the left side affects the 
laterality. These results suggest that Zic3 has at least two functionally
important domains that play different roles and provide a molecular basis for
human heterotaxy, which is an L-R pattern anomaly caused by a mutation in human
ZIC3.

PMID: 11044394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Cell Sci. 2000 Oct;113 Pt 19:3519-29.

Imaging patterns of calcium transients during neural induction in Xenopus laevis 
embryos.

Leclerc C(1), Webb SE, Daguzan C, Moreau M, Miller AL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547, Université Paul Sabatier,
F-31062 Toulouse CEDEX 04, France.

Through the injection of f-aequorin (a calcium-sensitive bioluminescent reporter)
into the dorsal micromeres of 8-cell stage Xenopus laevis embryos, and the use of
a Photon Imaging Microscope, distinct patterns of calcium signalling were
visualised during the gastrulation period. We present results to show that
localised domains of elevated calcium were observed exclusively in the anterior
dorsal part of the ectoderm, and that these transients increased in number and
amplitude between stages 9 to 11, just prior to the onset of neural induction.
During this time, however, no increase in cytosolic free calcium was observed in 
the ventral ectoderm, mesoderm or endoderm. The origin and role of these dorsal
calcium-signalling patterns were also investigated. Calcium transients require
the presence of functional L-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels. Inhibition 
of channel activation from stages 8 to 14 with the specific antagonist R(+)BayK
8644 led to a complete inhibition of the calcium transients during gastrulation
and resulted in severe defects in the subsequent formation of the anterior
nervous system. BayK treatment also led to a reduction in the expression of Zic3 
and geminin in whole embryos, and of NCAM in noggin-treated animal caps. The
possible role of calcium transients in regulating developmental gene expression
is discussed.

PMID: 10984442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Sep;8(9):704-8.

X-linked transposition of the great arteries and incomplete penetrance among
males with a nonsense mutation in ZIC3.

Mégarbané A(1), Salem N, Stephan E, Ashoush R, Lenoir D, Delague V, Kassab R,
Loiselet J, Bouvagnet P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph,
Beirut. mgargban@dm.net.lb

We report on a Lebanese family in which two maternal cousins suffered and died
very early in life from cardiac malformations. Both presented with a
transposition of the great arteries associated with one or several other cardiac 
defects. Various minor midline defects were also observed, but there were no
situs abnormalities other than a persistent left superior vena cava in one. A
maternal uncle of these two babies was born cyanotic and died on the third
post-natal day. Analysis of the ZIC3 gene, revealed the presence of a mutation in
the second exon leading to a truncation of the protein. Surprisingly, another
maternal uncle of the two affected cousins also had the mutation but was not
clinically affected. To our knowledge, this is the first instance of incomplete
penetrance in a male for a mutation in a chromosome X gene.

PMID: 10980576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Aug 12;9(13):1937-42.

The X-linked mouse mutation Bent tail is associated with a deletion of the Zic3
locus.

Carrel T(1), Purandare SM, Harrison W, Elder F, Fox T, Casey B, Herman GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Bent tail (BN:) is a spontaneous, semi-dominant mutation on the mouse X
chromosome that produces tail deformities and, rarely, open neural tube defects. 
Analysis of 292 normal male and affected male and female progeny from an
intraspecific back-cross involving BN: supports a gene order of cen-DXMit89-18.5 
+/- 2.3 cM-DXMit166-1.4 +/- 0.7 cM-BN:-1.0 +/- 0.6 cM-DXMit140 -4.8 +/- 1.3
cM-DXBay6-tel. A high frequency of sex chromosomal non-disjunction, unrelated to 
the BN: mutation, was also identified in the background strain. Refined genetic
and physical mapping of the BN: critical region demonstrate that the mutation is 
associated with a <170 kb submicroscopic deletion that includes the anonymous
microsatellite marker DXMit208 as well as the entire Zic3 locus. Human mutations 
in ZIC3 are associated with left-right axis malformations (MIM 306955, 208530,
207100). Abnormalities of abdominal and thoracic situs were also detected in
viable BN: males and females. The presence of anal and spinal abnormalities in
some of the human patients and the deletion of Zic3 in BN: mice support a key
role for this gene in neural tube development and closure.

PMID: 10942421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Jul 1;9(11):1615-22.

A deletion encompassing Zic3 in bent tail, a mouse model for X-linked neural tube
defects.

Klootwijk R(1), Franke B, van der Zee CE, de Boer RT, Wilms W, Hol FA, Mariman
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Bent tail is a mouse model for human neural tube defects. Bent tail mice are
characterized by a shortened, kinked tail. We have observed numerous aberrations 
in Bent tail embryos including exencephaly, rotation defects and occasionally
omphalocele, orofacial schisis and situs abnormalities. Exencephaly was seen in
>10% of all embryos and resulted from a closure defect of the hindbrain. Bent
tail maps to the proximal part of the X chromosome. By haplotype analysis we have
appointed the Bent tail locus to a 1.1 cM interval between markers DXMit159 and
DXMit143. Subsequent analysis has revealed the presence of a deletion in all
affected animals. The deletion is approximately 1 Mb in size and encompasses the 
gene for ZIC:3, a zinc finger transcription factor expressed in murine
neuroectoderm and dorsal axial mesoderm during neurulation. ZIC:3 is a homolog of
the Drosophila segmentation gene odd-paired. Although the Bent tail phenotype
probably is the result of the deletion of several genes, combining data on ZIC:3 
expression and function of ZIC: genes in the mouse shows that deletion of Zic3
alone is compatible with a major role of this gene in the congenital
malformations of the Bent tail mouse. In man, mutations in ZIC3 are associated
with situs abnormalities. These patients occasionally also show spina bifida,
indicating that genetic variation in human ZIC3 may contribute to other
congenital malformations, including neural tube defects.

PMID: 10861288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):227-35.

Regulation of early expression of Dlx3, a Xenopus anti-neural factor, by
beta-catenin signaling.

Beanan MJ(1), Feledy JA, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The ectoderm of the pre-gastrula Xenopus embryo has previously been shown to be
at least partially patterned along the dorsal-ventral axis. The early expression 
of the anti-neural homeodomain gene Dlx3 is localized to the ventral ectoderm by 
a mechanism that occurs prior to gastrulation and is independent of the Spemann
organizer. The repression of Dlx3 is mediated by signaling though beta-catenin,
but is probably not dependent on the induction of the Xnr3 or chordin genes by
beta-catenin. We propose a model in which this early regulation of Dlx3 accounts 
for the pro-neural bias of dorsal ectoderm.

PMID: 10704847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):75-85.

The POU domain gene, XlPOU 2 is an essential downstream determinant of neural
induction.

Matsuo-Takasaki M(1), Lim JH, Sato SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda 20892, USA.
mami@helix.nih.gov

The POU domain gene, XlPOU 2, acts as a transcriptional activator during
mid-gastrulation in Xenopus. Overexpression or misexpression of VP16-POU-GR, a
fusion protein consisting of the strong activator domain of VP16 and the POU
domain of XlPOU 2, results in ectopic expression of the neural-specific genes,
nrp-1, en-2, and beta-tubulin. In contrast, overexpressing a dominant-inhibitory 
form of XlPOU 2 inhibits the chordin-induced neuralization of uncommitted
ectoderm, and results in a loss of nrp-1 and en-2 expression in embryos.
Furthermore, in uncommitted ectoderm, XlPOU 2 regulates the developmental neural 
program that includes a number of pre-pattern genes and at least one proneural
gene, X-ngnr-1, thus playing a key role during neural determination.

PMID: 10559482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Keio J Med. 1999 Sep;48(3):111-23.

Mammalian neural induction and brain pattern formation.

Mikoshiba K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

In summary, as I mentioned, I have long be focusing on the cerebellum. I first
talked about the IP3 receptor in relation to the Purkinje cells. Ca2+ release
through IP3 receptor regulates the fertilization, cell division, and
dorso-ventral axis formation. It is also involved in learning and memory system. 
Gene called Zic is expressed in granule cells that make synaptic contact with
Purkinje cells. Zic1 is one of the genes important in cerebellar pattern
formation. Zic2 is essential in making our brain. Zic3 is important in the right 
and left axis formation. Purkinje cell and granule cell positioning are really
nicely determined. But we now have two genes that determine the positioning, that
may help to form a very nice and beautiful structure of the cerebellum. The
principles and evidences obtained through the study of the cerebellum are found
to be applied to other part of the brain, presumably because the cerebellum is
phylogenetically old and plays an important information processing for motor
movement.

PMID: 10535272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 15;212(2):455-64.

Inhibitory patterning of the anterior neural plate in Xenopus by homeodomain
factors Dlx3 and Msx1.

Feledy JA(1), Beanan MJ, Sandoval JJ, Goodrich JS, Lim JH, Matsuo-Takasaki M,
Sato SM, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

Patterning of the embryonic ectoderm is dependent upon the action of negative
(antineural) and positive (neurogenic) transcriptional regulators. Msx1 and Dlx3 
are two antineural genes for which the anterior epidermal-neural boundaries of
expression differ, probably due to differential sensitivity to BMP signaling in
the ectoderm. In the extreme anterior neural plate, Dlx3 is strongly expressed
while Msx1 is silent. While both of these factors prevent the activation of genes
specific to the nascent central nervous system, Msx1 inhibits anterior markers,
including Otx2 and cement gland-specific genes. Dlx3 has little, if any, effect
on these anterior neural plate genes, instead providing a permissive environment 
for their expression while repressing more panneural markers, including
prepattern genes belonging to the Zic family and BF-1. These properties define a 
molecular mechanism for translating the organizer-dependent morphogenic gradient 
of BMP activity into spatially restricted gene expression in the prospective
anterior neural plate.

PMID: 10433834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mech Dev. 1998 Jul;75(1-2):43-51.

Xenopus Zic family and its role in neural and neural crest development.

Nakata K(1), Nagai T, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center and Brain
Science Institute, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

We characterized two new members of the Zic family, Xenopus Zic1 and Zic2. They
are very similar to mouse Zic1 and Zic2 in the protein coding region including
the zinc finger domain. In early gastrula, Zic1 expression was restricted to the 
prospective neural plate region whereas Zic2 was expressed widely in the
ectoderm. We observed enhanced neural and neural crest-derived tissue formation
in the Zic1 or Zic2 overexpressed embryos and neural and neural crest marker
induction in the Zic1 or Zic2 overexpressed animal cap explants. Our findings
suggest that Zic1 and Zic2 have essentially the same properties as Zic3 and that 
the Xenopus Zic family may act cooperatively in the initial phase of neural and
neural crest development.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 9739105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nat Genet. 1997 Nov;17(3):305-8.

X-linked situs abnormalities result from mutations in ZIC3.

Gebbia M(1), Ferrero GB, Pilia G, Bassi MT, Aylsworth A, Penman-Splitt M, Bird
LM, Bamforth JS, Burn J, Schlessinger D, Nelson DL, Casey B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030-3498, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1997 Nov;17(3):252-4.

Vertebrates position unpaired organs of the chest and abdomen asymmetrically
along the left-right (LR) body axis. Each structure comes to lie non-randomly
with respect to the midline in an overall position designated situs solitus,
exemplified in humans by placement of the heart, stomach and spleen consistently 
to the left. Aberrant LR axis development can lead to randomization of individual
organ position (situs ambiguus) or to mirror-image reversal of all lateralized
structures (situs inversus). Previously we mapped a locus for situs abnormalities
in humans, HTX1, to Xq26.2 by linkage analysis in a single family (LR1) and by
detection of a deletion in an unrelated situs ambiguus male (Family LR2; refs
2,3). From this chromosomal region we have positionally cloned ZIC3, a gene
encoding a putative zinc-finger transcription factor. One frameshift, two
missense and two nonsense mutations have been identified in familial and sporadic
situs ambiguus. The frameshift allele is also associated with situs inversus
among some heterozygous females, suggesting that ZIC3 functions in the earliest
stages of LR-axis formation. ZIC3, which has not been previously implicated in
vertebrate LR-axis development, is the first gene unequivocally associated with
human situs abnormalities.

PMID: 9354794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Oct 28;94(22):11980-5.

Xenopus Zic3, a primary regulator both in neural and neural crest development.

Nakata K(1), Nagai T, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan.

Xenopus Zic3 is a Xenopus homologue of mouse Zic and Drosophila pair-rule gene,
odd-paired. We show here that Zic3 has significant roles both in neural and
neural crest development in Xenopus embryo. Expression of Zic3 is first detected 
in prospective neural plate region at gastrulation. Onset of the expression was
earlier than most proneural genes and followed chordin expression. The expression
was induced by blockade of BMP4 signal. Overexpression of Zic3 resulted in
hyperplastic neural and neural crest derived tissue. In animal cap explant, the
overexpression of Zic3 induced expression of all the proneural genes and neural
crest marker genes. These findings suggest that Zic3 can determine the ectodermal
cell fate and promote the earliest step of neural and neural crest development.

PMCID: PMC23676
PMID: 9342348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Biol. 1997 Feb 15;182(2):299-313.

The expression of the mouse Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 gene suggests an essential role 
for Zic genes in body pattern formation.

Nagai T(1), Aruga J, Takada S, Günther T, Spörle R, Schughart K, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

We examined the expression of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 genes in the mouse embryo by
means of in situ hybridization. Zic genes were found as a group of genes coding
for zinc finger proteins that are expressed in a restricted manner in the adult
mouse cerebellum. We showed that the genes are the vertebrate homologues of
Drosophila odd-paired, which may play an essential role in parasegmental
subdivision and in visceral mesoderm development. The expression of the three Zic
genes was first detected at gastrulation in a spatially restricted manner. At
neurulation, the expression became restricted to the dorsal neural ectoderm and
dorsal paraxial mesoderm. During organogenesis, the three genes were expressed in
specific regions of several developing organs, including dorsal areas of the
brain, spinal cord, paraxial mesenchyme, and epidermis, the marginal zone of the 
neural retina and distal regions of the developing limb. For all stages,
significant differences in the spatial expression of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 were
observed. Furthermore, the expression of Zic genes in Pax3, Wnt-1, and Wnt-3a
mutant embryos suggested that Zic genes are not primarily regulated by the three 
genes which were expressed in dorsal areas similar to Zic genes. However, in open
brain, a mutant with severe neural tube defects, and in the Wnt-3a mutant mice,
the expression of Zic genes was changed. The changed expression pattern in Wnt-3a
mutant mice suggests that Zic genes in the neural tube are regulated by the
factors from notochord. Our findings suggest that Zic genes are involved in many 
developmental processes. Furthermore, analysis of gene expression patterns in
different mouse mutants indicated that Zic genes may act upstream of many known
developmental regulatory genes.

PMID: 9070329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Gene. 1996 Jun 26;172(2):291-4.

Identification and characterization of Zic4, a new member of the mouse Zic gene
family.

Aruga J(1), Yozu A, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y, Chapman VM, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN) Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
jaruga@rtc.riken.go.jp

The mouse Zic genes encode zinc-finger (Zf) proteins expressed only in the
cerebellum of the adult brain. The genes are the vertebrate homologues of the
Drosophila pair-rule gene, odd-paired (opa). We identified a novel gene, Zic4,
which belongs to the Zic gene family, through a genomic and cDNA cloning study.
Zic4 is highly similar to Zic1, Zic2 and Zic3, especially in its Zf motif. An
analysis of the genomic organization of Zic4 showed that the gene shares a common
exon-intron boundary with Zic1, Zic2, Zic3 and opa. The chromosomal location of
Zic4 was determined to be mouse chromosome 9 in the vicinity of Zic1, using an
interspecific backcross panel. An RNase protection study showed that Zic4 is
expressed only in the cerebellum during the adult stage, as are the other Zic
genes. The temporal profile of mRNA expression in the developing cerebellum is
similar to that of Zic3 which has a peak on postnatal day 5. These findings
suggest that Zic4 is a gene which works cooperatively with other Zic genes during
cerebellar development.

PMID: 8682319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 12;271(2):1043-7.

The mouse zic gene family. Homologues of the Drosophila pair-rule gene
odd-paired.

Aruga J(1), Nagai T, Tokuyama T, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y, Chapman VM, Mikoshiba 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Ibaraki,
Japan.

The mouse Zic gene, which encodes a zinc finger protein, is expressed in the
developing or matured central nervous system in a highly restricted manner. We
identified two novel Zic-related genes (Zic2, Zic3) through genomic and cDNA
cloning. Both genes are highly similar to Zic(1), especially in their zinc finger
motif. A comparison of genomic organization among the three Zic genes showed that
they share common exon-intron boundaries and belong to the same gene family .
Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 were determined to mouse chromosome 9, 14, and X using an
interspecific backcross panel. Northern blotting and ribonuclease protection
showed that Zic2 and Zic3 are expressed in a restricted manner in the cerebellum 
at the adult stage. However, the temporal profile of the mRNA expression in the
developing cerebella differ in the three Zic genes. Furthermore, we found that
the Drosophila pair-rule gene, odd-paired is highly homologous to the Zic gene
family. The similarity was not only the zinc finger motif, but also the
exon-intron boundary was the same as those of mouse Zic gene family. These
findings suggest that the Zic gene family and Drosophila odd-paired are derived
from a common ancestral gene.

PMID: 8557628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


