
1. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):28257-68. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4960.

Addiction of pancreatic cancer cells to zinc-finger transcription factor ZIC2.

Inaguma S(1), Ito H(1), Riku M(1), Ikeda H(1), Kasai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

Activity of GLI transcription factors of Hedgehog signaling is key for various
cancer cell properties, especially in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
Zinc-finger transcriptional regulators ZIC1 to ZIC5 of ZIC gene family were
demonstrated to associate with GLI to increase the nuclear accumulation and
transcriptional activity of GLI. Notwithstanding this supportive role for
GLI-dependent transcription, it was not fully understood whether ZIC plays an
independent role in cancer cell biology. Here, we found that ZIC2 is
indispensable in the regulation of PDAC cell apoptosis. We found that human PDAC 
cell lines uniquely express ZIC2. ZIC2 knockdown induced PDAC cell apoptosis;
conversely, ZIC2 over-expression enhanced the cellular proliferation. Through a
comprehensive screening, we identified fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
(FGFR3) and ANNEXIN A8 (ANXA8) as genes up-regulated by ZIC2 in PDAC cells. The
forced expression of these two genes cooperatively rescued the apoptosis of
ZIC2-knockdown cells. Immunohistochemical analyses further supported the
correlation of ZIC2 expression and these genes in human pancreata harboring PDAC.
Intriguingly, the ZIC2-mediated up-regulation of FGFR3 and ANXA8 was indicated to
be GLI -independent. This evidence highlights the indispensable role of ZIC2 in
regulating cellular proliferation and apoptosis during PDAC development and
suggests a potential therapeutic target for PDAC.

PMCID: PMC4695058
PMID: 26318045  [PubMed - in process]


2. Brain Dev. 2015 Aug;37(7):714-8. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2014.10.009. Epub 2014
Nov 8.

Holoprosencephaly with cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in 13q deletion syndrome:
Critical region for cerebellar dysgenesis within 13q32.2q34.

Mimaki M(1), Shiihara T(2), Watanabe M(2), Hirakata K(3), Sakazume S(4), Ishiguro
A(5), Shimojima K(6), Yamamoto T(6), Oka A(5), Mizuguchi M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: mimaki-tky@umin.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Neurology, Gunma Children's Medical Center, Japan. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, Gunma Children's Medical Center, Japan. (4)Clinical Genetics
Center, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Japan. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Japan. (6)Tokyo
Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Japan; Developmental Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Japan.

We describe two unrelated patients with terminal deletions in the long arm of
chromosome 13 showing brain malformation consisting of holoprosencephaly and
cerebellar vermis hypoplasia. Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis
revealed a pure terminal deletion of 13q31.3q34 in one patient and a mosaic ring 
chromosome with 13q32.2q34 deletion in the other. Mutations in ZIC2, located
within region 13q32, cause holoprosencephaly, whereas the 13q32.2q32.3 region is 
associated with cerebellar vermis hypoplasia (Dandy-Walker syndrome). The rare
concurrence of these major brain malformations in our patients provides further
evidence that 13q32.2q32.3 deletion, harboring ZIC2 and ZIC5, leads to cerebellar
dysgenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25454392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Stem Cells. 2014 Aug;32(8):2061-71. doi: 10.1002/stem.1706.

Retinoic acid suppresses the canonical Wnt signaling pathway in embryonic stem
cells and activates the noncanonical Wnt signaling pathway.

Osei-Sarfo K(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York,
USA; Weill Cornell Meyer Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have both the ability to self-renew and to
differentiate into various cell lineages. Retinoic acid (RA), a metabolite of
Vitamin A, has a critical function in initiating lineage differentiation of ESCs 
through binding to the retinoic acid receptors. Additionally, the Wnt signaling
pathway plays a role in pluripotency and differentiation, depending on the
activation status of the canonical and noncanonical pathways. The activation of
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, which requires the nuclear accumulation of
ß-catenin and its interaction with Tcf1/Lef at Wnt response elements, is involved
in ESC stemness maintenance. The noncanonical Wnt signaling pathway, through
actions of Tcf3, can antagonize the canonical pathway. We show that RA activates 
the noncanonical Wnt signaling pathway, while concomitantly inhibiting the
canonical pathway. RA increases the expression of ligands and receptors of the
noncanonical Wnt pathway (Wnt 5a, 7a, Fzd2 and Fzd6), downstream signaling, and
Tcf3 expression. RA reduces the phosphorylated ß-catenin levels by fourfold,
although total ß-catenin levels do not change. We show that RA signaling
increases the dissociation of Tcf1 and the association of Tcf3 at promoters of
genes that regulate stemness (e.g., NR5A2, Lrh-1) or differentiation (e.g. Cyr61,
Zic5). Knockdown of Tcf3 increases Lrh-1 transcript levels in mESCs and prevents 
the RA-associated, fourfold increase in Zic5, indicating that RA requires Tcf3 to
effect changes in Zic5 levels. We demonstrate a novel role for RA in altering the
activation of these two Wnt signaling pathways and show that Tcf3 mediates some
actions of RA during differentiation.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4106995
PMID: 24648413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Neural Regen Res. 2013 Feb 5;8(4):293-300. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2013.04.001.

Differentiation of neuron-like cells from mouse parthenogenetic embryonic stem
cells.

Yan X(1), Yang Y(2), Liu W(1), Geng W(1), Du H(1), Cui J(1), Xie X(1), Hua J(3), 
Yu S(4), Li L(1), Chen F(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an 710069, Shaanxi
Province, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Tangdu Hospital, the
Fourth Military Medical University of Chinese PLA, Xi'an 710038, Shaanxi
Province, China. (3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University,
Yangling 712100, Shaanxi Province, China. (4)College of Veterinary Medicine,
Sichuan Agricultural University, Yaan 625001, Sichuan Province, China.

Parthenogenetic embryonic stem cells have pluripotent differentiation potentials,
akin to fertilized embryo-derived embryonic stem cells. The aim of this study was
to compare the neuronal differentiation potential of parthenogenetic and
fertilized embryo-derived embryonic stem cells. Before differentiation, karyotype
analysis was performed, with normal karyotypes detected in both parthenogenetic
and fertilized embryo-derived embryonic stem cells. Sex chromosomes were
identified as XX. Immunocytochemistry and quantitative real-time PCR detected
high expression of the pluripotent gene, Oct4, at both the mRNA and protein
levels, indicating pluripotent differentiation potential of the two embryonic
stem cell subtypes. Embryonic stem cells were induced with retinoic acid to form 
embryoid bodies, and then dispersed into single cells. Single cells were
differentiated in N2 differentiation medium for 9 days. Immunocytochemistry
showed parthenogenetic and fertilized embryo-derived embryonic stem cells both
express the neuronal cell markers nestin, ßIII-tubulin and myelin basic protein. 
Quantitative real-time PCR found expression of neurogenesis related genes (Sox-1,
Nestin, GABA, Pax6, Zic5 and Pitx1) in both types of embryonic stem cells, and
Oct4 expression was significantly decreased. Nestin and Pax6 expression in
parthenogenetic embryonic stem cells was significantly higher than that in
fertilized embryo-derived embryonic stem cells. Thus, our experimental findings
indicate that parthenogenetic embryonic stem cells have stronger neuronal
differentiation potential than fertilized embryo-derived embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4107530
PMID: 25206669  [PubMed]


5. Dev Cell. 2012 May 15;22(5):1052-64. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.03.003.

miR-9 controls the timing of neurogenesis through the direct inhibition of
antagonistic factors.

Coolen M(1), Thieffry D, Drivenes Ø, Becker TS, Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Zebrafish Neurogenetics Group, Laboratory of Neurobiology and Development,
CNRS UPR 3294, Institute of Neurobiology Alfred Fessard, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette
Cédex, France. coolen@inaf.cnrs-gif.fr

The timing of commitment and cell-cycle exit within progenitor populations during
neurogenesis is a fundamental decision that impacts both the number and identity 
of neurons produced during development. We show here that microRNA-9 plays a key 
role in this process through the direct inhibition of targets with antagonistic
functions. Across the ventricular zone of the developing zebrafish hindbrain,
miR-9 expression occurs at a range of commitment stages. Abrogating miR-9
function transiently delays cell-cycle exit, leading to the increased generation 
of late-born neuronal populations. Target protection analyses in vivo identify
the progenitor-promoting genes her6 and zic5 and the cell-cycle exit-promoting
gene elavl3/HuC as sequential targets of miR-9 as neurogenesis proceeds. We
propose that miR-9 activity generates an ambivalent progenitor state poised to
respond to both progenitor maintenance and commitment cues, which may be
necessary to adjust neuronal production to local extrinsic signals during late
embryogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22595676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):220-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.026. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

Xenopus Zic3 controls notochord and organizer development through suppression of 
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Fujimi TJ(1), Hatayama M, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic3 controls neuroectodermal differentiation and left-right patterning in
Xenopus laevis embryos. Here we demonstrate that Zic3 can suppress Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling and control development of the notochord and Spemann's organizer. When 
we overexpressed Zic3 by injecting its RNA into the dorsal marginal zone of
2-cell-stage embryos, the embryos lost mesodermal dorsal midline structures and
showed reduced expression of organizer markers (Siamois and Goosecoid) and a
notochord marker (Xnot). Co-injection of Siamois RNA partially rescued the
reduction of Xnot expression caused by Zic3 overexpression. Because the
expression of Siamois in the organizer region is controlled by Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling, we subsequently examined the functional interaction between Zic3 and
Wnt signaling. Co-injection of Xenopus Zic RNAs and ß-catenin RNA with a reporter
responsive to the Wnt/ß-catenin cascade indicated that Zic1, Zic2, Zic3, Zic4,
and Zic5 can all suppress ß-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation. In
addition, co-injection of Zic3 RNA inhibited the secondary axis formation caused 
by ventral-side injection of ß-catenin RNA in Xenopus embryos. Zic3-mediated
Wnt/ß-catenin signal suppression required the nuclear localization of Zic3, and
involved the reduction of ß-catenin nuclear transport and enhancement of
ß-catenin degradation. Furthermore, Zic3 co-precipitated with Tcf1 (a ß-catenin
co-factor) and XIC (I-mfa domain containing factor required for dorsoanterior
development). The findings in this report produce a novel system for fine-tuning 
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22056782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;20(4):389-97. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.203. Epub 2011 Nov
2.

Novel mutation and three other sequence variants segregating with phenotype at
keratoconus 13q32 susceptibility locus.

Czugala M(1), Karolak JA, Nowak DM, Polakowski P, Pitarque J, Molinari A,
Rydzanicz M, Bejjani BA, Yue BY, Szaflik JP, Gajecka M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Strzeszynska
32,Poznan, Poland.

Keratoconus (KTCN), a non-inflammatory corneal disorder characterized by stromal 
thinning, represents a major cause of corneal transplantations. Genetic and
environmental factors have a role in the etiology of this complex disease.
Previously reported linkage analysis revealed that chromosomal region 13q32 is
likely to contain causative gene(s) for familial KTCN. Consequently, we have
chosen eight positional candidate genes in this region: MBNL1, IPO5, FARP1,
RNF113B, STK24, DOCK9, ZIC5 and ZIC2, and sequenced all of them in 51 individuals
from Ecuadorian KTCN families and 105 matching controls. The mutation screening
identified one mutation and three sequence variants showing 100% segregation
under a dominant model with KTCN phenotype in one large Ecuadorian family. These 
substitutions were found in three different genes: c.2262A>C (p.Gln754His) and
c.720+43A>G in DOCK9; c.2377-132A>C in IPO5 and c.1053+29G>C in STK24. PolyPhen
analyses predicted that c.2262A>C (Gln754His) is possibly damaging for the
protein function and structure. Our results suggest that c.2262A>C (p.Gln754His) 
mutation in DOCK9 may contribute to the KTCN phenotype in the large KTCN-014
family.

PMCID: PMC3306853
PMID: 22045297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Clin Genet. 2012 Jun;81(6):584-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01684.x. Epub
2011 May 23.

Holoprosencephaly and ZIC2 microdeletions: novel clinical and epidemiological
specificities delineated.

Chabchoub E(1), Willekens D, Vermeesch JR, Fryns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals of Leuven, Catholic University
of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. elyes.chabchoub@med.kuleuven.be

Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common malformation of the human brain results 
from abnormal cleavage of the forebrain during the early embryonic developmental 
stages. The spectrum of malformations in HPE is wide, ranging from the classical 
cyclopia/proboscis to fairly asymptomatic forms [i.e. a single maxillary central 
incisor (SMCI)]. HPE may be caused by environmental or genetic factors. ZIC2
(13q32) was the second gene identified in which mutations cause HPE and recently 
a specific phenotype was ascribed to ZIC2-mutation HPE. Earlier, we reported a
boy presenting HPE and deafness. Cytogenetic analyses were normal. Using
array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), we found a de novo 129 kb
del(13)(q32) encompassing ZIC2 and ZIC5. There is no evidence for the involvement
of ZIC5 in human diseases. We reviewed the literature for ZIC2-ZIC5 deletions and
their involvement in neural tube defects (NTDs). Interestingly, we found evidence
for a specific facial phenotype for ZIC2 gene deletion patients distinct from
those with point mutations. In addition, based on the clinical data together with
pathology, imaging and functional studies, we suggest an outline for a model
explaining the genetic heterogeneity of ZIC2-ZIC5-associated NTDs and propose
further studies for validation.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21496007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Sep;152A(9):2308-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33550.

Description of the smallest critical region for Dandy-Walker malformation in
chromosome 13 in a girl with a cryptic deletion related to t(6;13)(q23;q32).

Mademont-Soler I(1), Morales C, Armengol L, Soler A, Sánchez A.

Author information: 
(1)Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

We report on a girl with mild dysmorphic facial features, Dandy-Walker
malformation (DWM), iris coloboma, profound hearing loss, and hyperlaxity of skin
and joints, whose karyotype is 46,XX,t(6;13)(q23;q32)dn and who has a cryptic
imbalance at the 13q32 translocation breakpoint assessed by array-CGH. Our
patient has many clinical manifestations in common with those of the previously
reported cases of 13q32 deletions, which suggests that at least part of the
abnormal phenotype is probably due to the imbalance. The recurrent finding of DWM
among patients with 13q deletions has led to the suggestions that candidate
gene/s for its development are on chromosome 13. We describe the smallest 13q
deletion associated to DWM, which allows further narrowing of the previously
established critical region for this brain malformation to 13q32.2-32.3. Among
the few genes of the deleted region, ZIC2 and ZIC5 seem the most plausible
candidates, which is in keeping with some previous reports. This work also
illustrates the usefulness of array-CGH platforms in the identification of
cryptic imbalances in carriers of apparently balanced rearrangements with
abnormal phenotypes.

PMID: 20683983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep;18(9):999-1005. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.70. Epub 2010
Jun 9.

The unfolding clinical spectrum of holoprosencephaly due to mutations in SHH,
ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF genes.

Paulussen AD(1), Schrander-Stumpel CT, Tserpelis DC, Spee MK, Stegmann AP,
Mancini GM, Brooks AS, Collée M, Maat-Kievit A, Simon ME, van Bever Y,
Stolte-Dijkstra I, Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Herkert JC, van Essen AJ, Lichtenbelt
KD, van Haeringen A, Kwee ML, Lachmeijer AM, Tan-Sindhunata GM, van Maarle MC,
Arens YH, Smeets EE, de Die-Smulders CE, Engelen JJ, Smeets HJ, Herbergs J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, School for Oncology & Developmental Biology
(GROW), Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands. aimee.paulussen@gen.unimaas.nl

Holoprosencephaly is a severe malformation of the brain characterized by abnormal
formation and separation of the developing central nervous system. The prevalence
is 1:250 during early embryogenesis, the live-born prevalence is 1:16 000. The
etiology of HPE is extremely heterogeneous and can be teratogenic or genetic. We 
screened four known HPE genes in a Dutch cohort of 86 non-syndromic HPE index
cases, including 53 family members. We detected 21 mutations (24.4%), 3 in SHH, 9
in ZIC2 and 9 in SIX3. Eight mutations involved amino-acid substitutions, 7
ins/del mutations, 1 frame-shift, 3 identical poly-alanine tract expansions and 2
gene deletions. Pathogenicity of mutations was presumed based on de novo
character, predicted non-functionality of mutated proteins, segregation of
mutations with affected family-members or combinations of these features. Two
mutations were reported previously. SNP array confirmed detected deletions; one
spanning the ZIC2/ZIC5 genes (approx. 100 kb) the other a 1.45 Mb deletion
including SIX2/SIX3 genes. The mutation percentage (24%) is comparable with
previous reports, but we detected significantly less mutations in SHH: 3.5 vs
10.7% (P=0.043) and significantly more in SIX3: 10.5 vs 4.3% (P=0.018). For TGIF1
and ZIC2 mutation the rate was in conformity with earlier reports. About half of 
the mutations were de novo, one was a germ line mosaic. The familial mutations
displayed extensive heterogeneity in clinical manifestation. Of seven familial
index patients only two parental carriers showed minor HPE signs, five were
completely asymptomatic. Therefore, each novel mutation should be considered as a
risk factor for clinically manifest HPE, with the caveat of reduced clinical
penetrance.

PMCID: PMC2987413
PMID: 20531442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMC Cancer. 2010 Mar 3;10:79. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-79.

Expression of ZIC family genes in meningiomas and other brain tumors.

Aruga J(1), Nozaki Y, Hatayama M, Odaka YS, Yokota N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Zic zinc finger proteins are present in the developing rodent
meninges and are required for cell proliferation and differentiation of meningeal
progenitors. Although human ZIC genes are known to be molecular markers for
medulloblastomas, their expression in meningioma has not been addressed to date.
METHODS: We examined the mRNA and protein expression of human ZIC1, ZIC2, ZIC3,
ZIC4 and ZIC5 genes in meningiomas in comparison to other brain tumors, using
RT-PCR, analysis of published microarray data, and immunostaining.
RESULTS: ZIC1, ZIC2 and ZIC5 transcript levels in meningiomas were higher than
those in whole brain or normal dura mater, whereas all five ZIC genes were
abundantly expressed in medulloblastomas. The expression level of ZIC1 in public 
microarray data was greater in meningiomas classified as World Health
Organization Grade II (atypical) than those classified as Grade I (benign).
Immunoscreening using anti-ZIC antibodies revealed that 23 out of 23 meningioma
cases were ZIC1/2/3/5-immunopositive. By comparison, nuclear staining by the
anti-ZIC4 antibody was not observed in any meningioma case, but was strongly
detected in all four medulloblastomas. ZIC-positive meningiomas included
meningothelial, fibrous, transitional, and psammomatous histological subtypes. In
normal meninges, ZIC-like immunoreactivities were detected in vimentin-expressing
arachnoid cells both in human and mouse.
CONCLUSIONS: ZIC1, ZIC2, and ZIC5 are novel molecular markers for meningiomas
whereas ZIC4 expression is highly selective for medulloblastomas. The pattern of 
ZIC expression in both of these tumor types may reflect the properties of the
tissues from which the tumors are derived.

PMCID: PMC2838823
PMID: 20199689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2010 Feb 1;338(1):50-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.11.024. Epub 2009
Nov 24.

Xenopus Meis3 protein lies at a nexus downstream to Zic1 and Pax3 proteins,
regulating multiple cell-fates during early nervous system development.

Gutkovich YE(1), Ofir R, Elkouby YM, Dibner C, Gefen A, Elias S, Frank D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Rappaport Family Institute for Research in the
Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, 
Haifa 31096, Israel.

In Xenopus embryos, XMeis3 protein activity is required for normal hindbrain
formation. Our results show that XMeis3 protein knock down also causes a loss of 
primary neuron and neural crest cell lineages, without altering expression of
Zic, Sox or Pax3 genes. Knock down or inhibition of the Pax3, Zic1 or Zic5
protein activities extinguishes embryonic expression of the XMeis3 gene, as well 
as triggering the loss of hindbrain, neural crest and primary neuron cell fates. 
Ectopic XMeis3 expression can rescue the Zic knock down phenotype. HoxD1 is an
XMeis3 direct-target gene, and ectopic HoxD1 expression rescues cell fate losses 
in either XMeis3 or Zic protein knock down embryos. FGF3 and FGF8 are direct
target genes of XMeis3 protein and their expression is lost in XMeis3 morphant
embryos. In the genetic cascade controlling embryonic neural cell specification, 
XMeis3 lies below general-neuralizing, but upstream of FGF and regional-specific 
genes. Thus, XMeis3 protein is positioned at a key regulatory point,
simultaneously regulating multiple neural cell fates during early vertebrate
nervous system development.

PMID: 19944089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Cell Sci. 2009 Jun 15;122(Pt 12):2137-48. doi: 10.1242/jcs.043471. Epub 2009
May 26.

A novel genetic mechanism regulates dorsolateral hinge-point formation during
zebrafish cranial neurulation.

Nyholm MK(1), Abdelilah-Seyfried S, Grinblat Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

During neurulation, vertebrate embryos form a neural tube (NT), the rudiment of
the central nervous system. In mammals and birds, a key step in cranial NT
morphogenesis is dorsolateral hinge-point (DLHP) bending, which requires an
apical actomyosin network. The mechanism of DLHP formation is poorly understood, 
although several essential genes have been identified, among them Zic2, which
encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor. We found that DLHP formation in the
zebrafish midbrain also requires actomyosin and Zic function. Given this
conservation, we used the zebrafish to study how genes encoding Zic proteins
regulate DLHP formation. We demonstrate that the ventral zic2a expression border 
predicts DLHP position. Using morpholino (MO) knockdown, we show zic2a and zic5
are required for apical F-actin and active myosin II localization and junction
integrity. Furthermore, myosin II activity can function upstream of junction
integrity during DLHP formation, and canonical Wnt signaling, an activator of zic
gene transcription, is necessary for apical active myosin II localization,
junction integrity and DLHP formation. We conclude that zic genes act downstream 
of Wnt signaling to control cytoskeletal organization, and possibly adhesion,
during neurulation. This study identifies zic2a and zic5 as crucial players in
the genetic network linking patterned gene expression to morphogenetic changes
during neurulation, and strengthens the utility of the zebrafish midbrain as a NT
morphogenesis model.

PMCID: PMC2723160
PMID: 19470582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Jan;149(1):191-201. Epub 2007 Sep
16.

Ethanol teratogenesis in Japanese medaka: effects at the cellular level.

Wu M(1), Chaudhary A, Khan IA, Dasmahapatra AK.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Natural Product Research, Environmental Toxicology
Research Program, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, MS 38677, USA.

The adverse effects of alcohol on the developing humans represent a spectrum of
structural and neurobehavioral abnormalities, most appropriately termed as fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). The mechanism by which ethanol induces FASD is 
unknown. Human studies of FASD are very limited due to ethical constraints;
however, several animal models from nematodes to mammals are utilized to
understand the molecular mechanism of this disorder. We have used Japanese medaka
(Oryzias latipes) embryo-larval development as a unique non-mammalian model to
study the molecular mechanism of FASD. Fertilized medaka eggs were exposed to
ethanol (0-400 mM) for 48 h post fertilization (hpf) and then maintained in
regular embryo rearing medium without ethanol. Viable embryos were harvested on
0, 2, 4 and 6 day post fertilization (dpf) and analyzed for DNA, RNA and protein 
contents of the embryos. By applying semi-quantitative RT-PCR (rRT-PCR) and
quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), RNA samples were further analyzed for
seven transcription factors, emx2, en2, iro3, otx2, shh, wnt1 and zic5 which are 
expressed in the neural tube of medaka embryo during early phase of development. 
RNA and protein contents of the embryos were significantly reduced by ethanol at 
400 mM dose on 4 and 6 dpf compared to the control (no ethanol), and 100 mM
ethanol treated embryos. However, significant reduction of DNA was observed only 
in 4 dpf embryos. Total protein contents of yolk remained unaltered after ethanol
treatment. Expression pattern of emx2, en2, iro3, otx2, shh, wnt1, and zic5 mRNAs
were found to be developmentally regulated, however, remained unaltered after
ethanol treatment. It is therefore concluded that alteration of nucleic acid and 
protein contents of medaka embryo by ethanol could be used as an indicator of
embryonic growth retardation which might be the result of disruption of specific 
gene function during development.

PMCID: PMC2220156
PMID: 17913529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Development. 2007 Feb;134(4):735-46. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

The zebrafish zic2a-zic5 gene pair acts downstream of canonical Wnt signaling to 
control cell proliferation in the developing tectum.

Nyholm MK(1), Wu SF, Dorsky RI, Grinblat Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Wnt growth factors acting through the canonical intracellular signaling cascade
play fundamental roles during vertebrate brain development. In particular,
canonical Wnt signaling is crucial for normal development of the dorsal midbrain,
the future optic tectum. Wnts act both as patterning signals and as regulators of
cell growth. In the developing tectum, Wnt signaling is mitogenic; however, the
mechanism of Wnt function is not known. As a step towards better understanding
this mechanism, we have identified two new Wnt targets, the closely linked zic2a 
and zic5 genes. Using a combination of in vivo assays, we show that zic2a and
zic5 transcription is activated by Tcf/Lef transcription factors in the dorsal
midbrain. Zic2a and Zic5, in turn, have essential, cooperative roles in promoting
cell proliferation in the tectum, but lack obvious patterning functions.
Collectively these findings suggest that Wnts control midbrain proliferation, at 
least in part, through regulation of two novel target genes, the zic2a-zic5 gene 
pair.

PMID: 17215296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Med Genet. 2007 Jan;44(1):e60.

13q Deletion and central nervous system anomalies: further insights from
karyotype-phenotype analyses of 14 patients.

Ballarati L, Rossi E, Bonati MT, Gimelli S, Maraschio P, Finelli P, Giglio S,
Lapi E, Bedeschi MF, Guerneri S, Arrigo G, Patricelli MG, Mattina T, Guzzardi O, 
Pecile V, Police A, Scarano G, Larizza L, Zuffardi O, Giardino D.

BACKGROUND: Chromosome 13q deletion is associated with varying phenotypes, which 
seem to depend on the location of the deleted segment. Although various attempts 
have been made to link the 13q deletion intervals to distinct phenotypes, there
is still no acknowledged consensus correlation between the monosomy of distinct
13q regions and specific clinical features.
METHODS: 14 Italian patients carrying partial de novo 13q deletions were studied.
Molecular-cytogenetic characterisation was carried out by means of
array-comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH) or fluorescent in situ
hybridisation (FISH).
RESULTS: Our 14 patients showed mental retardation ranging from profound-severe
to moderate-mild: eight had central nervous system (CNS) anomalies, including
neural tube defects (NTDs), six had eye abnormalities, nine had facial
dysmorphisms and 10 had hand or feet anomalies. The size of the deleted regions
varied from 4.2 to 75.7 Mb.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first systematic molecular characterisation of de
novo 13q deletions, and offers a karyotype-phenotype correlation based on
detailed clinical studies and molecular determinations of the deleted regions.
Analyses confirm that patients lacking the 13q32 band are the most seriously
affected, and critical intervals have been preliminarily assigned for CNS
malformations. Dose-sensitive genes proximal to q33.2 may be involved in NTDs.
The minimal deletion interval associated with the Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM)
was narrowed to the 13q32.2-33.2 region, in which the ZIC2 and ZIC5 genes
proposed as underlying various CNS malformations are mapped.

PMCID: PMC2597907
PMID: 17209130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Dyn. 2006 Dec;235(12):3379-86.

Xenopus Zic4: conservation and diversification of expression profiles and protein
function among the Xenopus Zic family.

Fujimi TJ(1), Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

We compared the expression and function of Xenopus Zic4 with those of the other
four Xenopus laevis Zic family members (Zic1, Zic2, Zic3, and Zic5). Zic4
expression was detected mainly in the neural plate border, dorsal neural tube,
and somites, and was similar to that of Zic1, which is adjacent to Zic4 on the
same chromosome. Injection of wild-type or mutant Zic4 RNA caused the induction
of neural crest marker gene expression, hyperplastic neural tissue, and ectopic
pigment cell formation, indicating that Zic4 can induce neural and neural crest
tissue, as can other Xenopus Zic genes. Deletion analysis showed that the
zinc-finger domain is critical for many Zic4 functions, but the C-terminal region
is differently involved in induction of two neural crest markers, Slug and Sox10.
The protein function as determined by the animal cap explant assay was similar to
that of Zic5, but different from those of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3, suggesting that
Xenopus Zic genes can be divided into two groups based on function. These results
indicate that the five Xenopus Zic genes cooperatively regulate both neural and
neural crest development, despite significantly diverged expression profiles and 
functions.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16871625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dev Dyn. 2005 Apr;232(4):1056-61.

Characterization of Opr deficiency in mouse brain: subtle defects in dorsomedial 
telencephalon and medioventral forebrain.

Furushima K(1), Murata T, Kiyonari H, Aizawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Animal Resources and Genetic Engineering, Center for
Developmental Biology (CDB), RIKEN Kobe, Kobe, Japan.

Opr/Zic5 is a zinc-finger gene belonging to, and unique in, the opa/Zic family.
Its expression is found in the anterior epiblast and anterior neuroectoderm
during gastrulation and early neurulation. Later, we found the expression
characteristic in the dorsomedial parts of forebrain and midbrain. However, no
defects were apparent in embryonic day 10.5 Opr null mutants, and subtle defects 
were later found in medial pallium and ventral structures of forebrain,
suggesting the compensation of Opr deficiency by its cognate(s).

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15736266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Clin Genet. 2005 Apr;67(4):290-6.

The ZIC gene family in development and disease.

Grinberg I(1), Millen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The human ZIC gene family is comprised of five members encoding zinc-finger
transcription factors, which are the vertebrate homologs of the Drosophila
odd-paired gene. Mutations in ZIC genes in humans have recently been implicated
in a wide variety of congenital malformations, including Dandy-Walker
malformation, holoprosencephaly, neural tube defects, and heterotaxy. Mutant
analysis of these genes in mice has underscored the conserved developmental roles
of these genes. Further, this analysis has begun to elucidate the molecular and
developmental mechanisms underlying these important birth defects.

PMID: 15733262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Nov 5;324(1):302-7.

Molecular properties of Zic4 and Zic5 proteins: functional diversity within Zic
family.

Ishiguro A(1), Inoue T, Mikoshiba K, Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Comparative Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The Zic-family proteins control various developmental processes. Previous studies
have shown that Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 can act as transcriptional regulators, and
that their functions are repressed by I-mfa, which has been identified as a
repressor for basic helix-loop-helix-type transcriptional factors. Here, we
investigated the molecular properties of the Zic4 and Zic5 proteins. Zic4/Zic5
showed DNA-binding activity to the Gli-binding sequence, similar to
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins. However, Zic4/Zic5 did not exhibit any significant
transcriptional activation ability nor they bind to I-mfa differently from
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3. The nuclear localization of Zic4/Zic5 was not affected by the
presence of the I-mfa protein, whereas the Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins were
translocated to the cytoplasmic compartment in the presence of I-mfa. The
difference may be attributable to the dissimilarity of the N-terminal region
between the Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 and Zic4/Zic5 proteins, since the binding of the
Zic1/Zic2/Zic3 proteins to I-mfa occurs through their N-terminal regions.

PMID: 15465018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 1;270(1):146-62.

Mouse Zic5 deficiency results in neural tube defects and hypoplasia of cephalic
neural crest derivatives.

Inoue T(1), Hatayama M, Tohmonda T, Itohara S, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology and Laboratory for Comparative
Neurogenesis, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198,
Japan.

Zic family genes encode zinc finger proteins, which are homologues of the
Drosophila pair-rule gene odd-paired. In the present study, we characterized the 
fifth member of the mouse Zic family gene, mouse Zic5. Zic5 is located near Zic2,
which is responsible for human brain malformation syndrome (holoprosencephaly, or
HPE). In embryonic stages, Zic5 was expressed in dorsal part of neural tissues
and limbs. Expression of Zic5 overlapped with those of other Zic genes, most
closely with Zic2, but was not identical. Targeted disruption of Zic5 resulted in
insufficient neural tube closure at the rostral end, similar to that seen in Zic2
mutant mice. In addition, the Zic5-deficient mice exhibited malformation of
neural-crest-derived facial bones, especially the mandible, which had not been
observed in other Zic family mutants. During the embryonic stages, there were
delays in the development of the first branchial arch and extension of the
trigeminal and facial nerves. Neural crest marker staining revealed fewer neural 
crest cells in the dorsal cephalic region of the mutant embryos without
significant changes in their migration. When mouse Zic5 was overexpressed in
Xenopus embryos, expression of a neural crest marker was enhanced. These findings
suggested that Zic5 is involved in the generation of neural crest tissue in mouse
development. ZIC5 is also located close to ZIC2 in humans, and deletions of
13q32, where ZIC2 is located, lead to congenital brain and digit malformations
known as the "13q32 deletion syndrome". Based on both their similar expression
pattern in mouse embryos and the malformations observed in Zic5-deficient mutant 
mice, human ZIC5 might be involved in the deletion syndrome.

PMID: 15136147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 May;4(3):345-50.

Sequence relationships and expression patterns of zebrafish zic2 and zic5 genes.

Toyama R(1), Gomez DM, Mana MD, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 6B, Room 413, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The zinc finger motif forms a DNA binding domain that is found in a wide variety 
of proteins. Among them, the members of the zic gene family are highly conserved 
throughout metazoans. We report here the isolation of two new members of this
gene family in zebrafish, zic2.2 and zic5, isolated during random screening for
tissue-specific genes. Zic2.2 is closely related to the previously reported zic2 
gene, which we propose to rename zic2.1; these two genes form a subfamily with
other vertebrate zic2 genes. We compare here the expression patterns of zic2.1,
zic2.2, and zic5. All three genes showed dynamic expression patterns starting
after the initiation of zygotic transcription, predominantly in the developing
neural tube. Compared to zic2.1, zic2.2 was expressed in a similar but distinct
manner during early development, particularly in the retina and the forming
somites. A zic2.2 ortholog has not been identified in other vertebrate species,
suggesting that the zic2.1/zic2.2 pair resulted from a genome duplication event
during the evolution of the zebrafish lineage.

PMID: 15053986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Development. 2003 Jul;130(14):3111-24.

Neural crest induction by paraxial mesoderm in Xenopus embryos requires FGF
signals.

Monsoro-Burq AH(1), Fletcher RB, Harland RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California at
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. monsoro@uclink.berkeley.edu

At the border of the neural plate, the induction of the neural crest can be
achieved by interactions with the epidermis, or with the underlying mesoderm. Wnt
signals are required for the inducing activity of the epidermis in chick and
amphibian embryos. Here, we analyze the molecular mechanisms of neural crest
induction by the mesoderm in Xenopus embryos. Using a recombination assay, we
show that prospective paraxial mesoderm induces a panel of neural crest markers
(Slug, FoxD3, Zic5 and Sox9), whereas the future axial mesoderm only induces a
subset of these genes. This induction is blocked by a dominant negative (dn) form
of FGFR1. However, neither dnFGFR4a nor inhibition of Wnt signaling prevents
neural crest induction in this system. Among the FGFs, FGF8 is strongly expressed
by the paraxial mesoderm. FGF8 is sufficient to induce the neural crest markers
FoxD3, Sox9 and Zic5 transiently in the animal cap assay. In vivo, FGF8
injections also expand the Slug expression domain. This suggests that FGF8 can
initiate neural crest formation and cooperates with other DLMZ-derived factors to
maintain and complete neural crest induction. In contrast to Wnts, eFGF or bFGF, 
FGF8 elicits neural crest induction in the absence of mesoderm induction and
without a requirement for BMP antagonists. In vivo, it is difficult to dissociate
the roles of FGF and WNT factors in mesoderm induction and neural patterning. We 
show that, in most cases, effects on neural crest formation were parallel to
altered mesoderm or neural development. However, neural and neural crest
patterning can be dissociated experimentally using different dominant-negative
manipulations: while Nfz8 blocks both posterior neural plate formation and neural
crest formation, dnFGFR4a blocks neural patterning without blocking neural crest 
formation. These results suggest that different signal transduction mechanisms
may be used in neural crest induction, and anteroposterior neural patterning.

PMID: 12783784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Development. 2003 Feb;130(3):483-94.

Snail precedes slug in the genetic cascade required for the specification and
migration of the Xenopus neural crest.

Aybar MJ(1), Nieto MA, Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
de Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile.

The complex sequence of inductive events responsible for the generation of the
neural crest at the border between the neural plate and the epidermis, triggers a
genetic cascade involving several families of transcription factors. Two members 
of the Snail family, Snail and Slug, have both been implicated in this cascade.
In chick and Xenopus, loss- and gain-of-function experiments have provided
evidence that Slug plays a key role in neural crest development. However, in
contrast to the chick, Snail rather than Slug is expressed in the premigratory
neural crest in the mouse and, in Xenopus, Snail precedes Slug expression in this
population. Thus, in order to study the function of Snail in neural crest
development in Xenopus, we have carried out conditional gain- and
loss-of-function experiments using different Snail constructs fused to a
glucocorticoid receptor element. We show that Snail is able to induce the
expression of Slug and all other neural crest markers tested (Zic5, FoxD3, Twist 
and Ets1) at the time of specification. This activation is observed in whole
embryos and in animal caps, in the absence of neural plate and mesodermal
markers. We show that Snail is required for neural crest specification and
migration and that it works as a transcriptional repressor. These functions have 
been previously attributed to SLUG: However, Slug alone is unable to induce other
neural crest markers in animal cap assays, and we show that Snail and Slug can be
functionally equivalent when tested in overexpression studies. This suggests
that, in Xenopus embryos, at least some of the functions previously attributed to
Slug can be carried out by SNAIL: This is additionally supported by rescue
experiments in embryos injected with dominant-negative constructs that indicate
that Snail lies upstream of Slug in the genetic cascade leading to neural crest
formation and that it plays a key role in crest development.

PMID: 12490555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Trends Biochem Sci. 2002 Jan;27(1):10.

OPR, PC and AID: all in the PB1 family.

Ponting CP, Ito T, Moscat J, Diaz-Meco MT, Inagaki F, Sumimoto H.

PMID: 11796218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mech Dev. 2000 Dec;99(1-2):83-91.

A novel member of the Xenopus Zic family, Zic5, mediates neural crest
development.

Nakata K(1), Koyabu Y, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, 351-0198, Saitama, Japan.

We characterized Xenopus Zic5 which belongs to a novel class of the Zic family.
Zic5 is more specifically expressed in the prospective neural crest than other
Zic genes. Overexpression of Zic5 in embryos led to ectopic expression of the
early neural crest markers, Xsna and Xslu, with the loss of epidermal marker
expression. In Zic5-overexpressing animal cap explants, there was marked
induction of neural crest markers, without mesodermal and anterior neural
markers. This was in contrast to other Xenopus Zic genes, which induce both
anterior and the neural crest markers in the same assay. Injection of a
dominant-negative form of Zic5 can block neural crest formation in vivo. These
results indicate that Zic5 expression converts cells from an epidermal fate to a 
neural crest cell fate. This is the first evidence for neural crest tissue
inductive activity separate from anterior neural tissue inductive activity in a
Zic family gene.

PMID: 11091076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mech Dev. 2000 Nov;98(1-2):161-4.

A new murine zinc finger gene, Opr.

Furushima K(1), Murata T, Matsuo I, Aizawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphogenesis, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics,
Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjyo, 860-0811, Kumamoto, Japan.

Here we report a novel murine zinc-finger gene, Opr, belonging to the opa/Zic
family. Opr is expressed in the entire embryonic ectoderm before gastrulation,
but gradually restricted to the anterior part from the mid to late streak stage. 
At the beginning of neural induction, Opr is expressed throughout the anterior
neural plate, but is soon restricted to the neural ridge. After neural tube
closure, its expression is maintained in the dorsal part of the neural tube,
except for the roof of the telencephalon. Opr is also expressed in somites and
limbs.

PMID: 11044622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


