
1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;15(1):65-74. doi: 10.1038/nrm3716. Epub 2013 Dec 
11.

The return of the nucleus: transcriptional and epigenetic control of autophagy.

Füllgrabe J(1), Klionsky DJ(2), Joseph B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology Pathology, Cancer Centrum Karolinska, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm 17176, Sweden. (2)Life Sciences Institute and Departments
of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology and Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Autophagy is a conserved process by which cytoplasmic components are degraded by 
the lysosome. It is commonly seen as a cytoplasmic event and, until now, nuclear 
events were not considered of primary importance for this process. However,
recent studies have unveiled a transcriptional and epigenetic network that
regulates autophagy. The identification of tightly controlled transcription
factors (such as TFEB and ZKSCAN3), microRNAs and histone marks (especially
acetylated Lys16 of histone 4 (H4K16ac) and dimethylated H3K9 (H3K9me2))
associated with the autophagic process offers an attractive conceptual framework 
to understand the short-term transcriptional response and potential long-term
responses to autophagy.

PMID: 24326622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 1;23(5):1376-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt527. Epub 2013 Oct
22.

Transcriptional activation of TFEB/ZKSCAN3 target genes underlies enhanced
autophagy in spinobulbar muscular atrophy.

Chua JP(1), Reddy SL, Merry DE, Adachi H, Katsuno M, Sobue G, Robins DM,
Lieberman AP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and.

Spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is an inherited neuromuscular disorder caused
by the expansion of a CAG repeat encoding a polyglutamine tract in exon 1 of the 
androgen receptor (AR) gene. SBMA demonstrates androgen-dependent toxicity due to
unfolding and aggregation of the mutant protein. There are currently no
disease-modifying therapies, but of increasing interest for therapeutic targeting
is autophagy, a highly conserved cellular process mediating protein quality
control. We have previously shown that genetic manipulations inhibiting autophagy
diminish skeletal muscle atrophy and extend the lifespan of AR113Q knock-in mice.
In contrast, manipulations inducing autophagy worsen muscle atrophy, suggesting
that chronic, aberrant upregulation of autophagy contributes to pathogenesis.
Since the degree to which autophagy is altered in SBMA and the mechanisms
responsible for such alterations are incompletely defined, we sought to delineate
autophagic status in SBMA using both cellular and mouse models. Here, we confirm 
that autophagy is induced in cellular and knock-in mouse models of SBMA and show 
that the transcription factors transcription factor EB (TFEB) and ZKSCAN3 operate
in opposing roles to underlie these changes. We demonstrate upregulation of TFEB 
target genes in skeletal muscle from AR113Q male mice and SBMA patients.
Furthermore, we observe a greater response in AR113Q mice to physiological
stimulation of autophagy by both nutrient starvation and exercise. Taken
together, our results indicate that transcriptional signaling contributes to
autophagic dysregulation and provides a mechanistic framework for the pathologic 
increase of autophagic responsiveness in SBMA.

PMCID: PMC3919011
PMID: 24150846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell. 2013 Apr 11;50(1):16-28. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.01.024. Epub 2013
Feb 21.

ZKSCAN3 is a master transcriptional repressor of autophagy.

Chauhan S(1), Goodwin JG, Chauhan S, Manyam G, Wang J, Kamat AM, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Autophagy constitutes a major cell-protective mechanism that eliminates damaged
components and maintains energy homeostasis via recycling nutrients under
normal/stressed conditions. Although the core components of autophagy have been
well studied, regulation of autophagy at the transcriptional level is poorly
understood. Herein, we establish ZKSCAN3, a zinc finger family DNA-binding
protein, as a transcriptional repressor of autophagy. Silencing of ZKSCAN3
induced autophagy and increased lysosome biogenesis. Importantly, we show that
ZKSCAN3 represses transcription of a large gene set (>60) integral to, or
regulatory for, autophagy and lysosome biogenesis/function and that a subset of
these genes, including Map1lC3b and Wipi2, represent direct targets.
Interestingly, ZKSCAN3 and TFEB are oppositely regulated by starvation and in
turn oppositely regulate lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, suggesting that they
act in conjunction. Altogether, our study uncovers an autophagy master switch
regulating the expression of a transcriptional network of genes integral to
autophagy and lysosome biogenesis/function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3628091
PMID: 23434374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;44(7):1166-73. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.04.005. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

The zinc finger transcription factor ZKSCAN3 promotes prostate cancer cell
migration.

Zhang X(1), Jing Y, Qin Y, Hunsucker S, Meng H, Sui J, Jiang Y, Gao L, An G, Yang
N, Orlowski RZ, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, PR China.

In our previous studies, ZKSCAN3 was demonstrated to be over-expressed in
invasive colonic tumor cells and their liver metastases, but minimally expressed 
in adjacent non-transformed tissues. Further preliminary data showed that ZKSCAN3
was expressed in a majority of prostate cancer patient samples, but not in normal
prostate tissues. Moreover, the ZKSCAN3 protein is highly expressed in the PC3
prostate cancer cell line, which has high metastatic potential, but little
expression was observed in non-metastatic prostate cancer cell lines. Thus, we
hypothesized that ZKSCAN3 could participate in tumor metastasis by regulating
tumor cell migration. To test this hypothesis, ZKSCAN3 mRNA was knocked down by
ZKSCAN3 specific shRNA in PC3 cells and a significant decrease in cell motility
was observed. In contrast, when ZKSCAN3 cDNA was overexpressed in PC3 cells, cell
detachment was observed and suspension culture induced apoptosis was greatly
decreased, suggesting that ZKSCAN3 is able to enhance PC3 cell survival under
anoikis stress. Additional wound healing and invasion assays showed that cell
migration was enhanced by ZKSCAN3 expression. Interestingly, the ZKSCAN3 gene was
amplified in 26% (5/19) of metastatic prostate cancers and 20% (1/5) of lymph
node metastases, but there was no amplification found in primary prostate
cancers, further supporting the role of ZKSCAN3 in tumor cell migration. In vivo 
studies using orthotopic tumor models indicated that overexpression of ZKSCAN3
significantly enhanced tumorigenicity. Taken together, we provide evidence that
ZKSCAN3, a zinc finger transcription factor, plays a critical role in promoting
prostate cancer cell migration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3358443
PMID: 22531714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Blood. 2012 Aug 2;120(5):1060-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-405977. Epub 2012 Apr
23.

Whole-genome sequencing of multiple myeloma from diagnosis to plasma cell
leukemia reveals genomic initiating events, evolution, and clonal tides.

Egan JB(1), Shi CX, Tembe W, Christoforides A, Kurdoglu A, Sinari S, Middha S,
Asmann Y, Schmidt J, Braggio E, Keats JJ, Fonseca R, Bergsagel PL, Craig DW,
Carpten JD, Stewart AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ 85259,
USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Aug 2;120(5):927-8.

The longitudinal evolution of a myeloma genome from diagnosis to plasma cell
leukemia has not previously been reported. We used whole-genome sequencing (WGS) 
on 4 purified tumor samples and patient germline DNA drawn over a 5-year period
in a t(4;14) multiple myeloma patient. Tumor samples were acquired at diagnosis, 
first relapse, second relapse, and end-stage secondary plasma cell leukemia
(sPCL). In addition to the t(4;14), all tumor time points also shared 10 common
single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) on WGS comprising shared initiating events.
Interestingly, we observed genomic sequence variants that waxed and waned with
time in progressive tumors, suggesting the presence of multiple independent, yet 
related, clones at diagnosis that rose and fell in dominance. Five newly acquired
SNVs, including truncating mutations of RB1 and ZKSCAN3, were observed only in
the final sPCL sample suggesting leukemic transformation events. This
longitudinal WGS characterization of the natural history of a high-risk myeloma
patient demonstrated tumor heterogeneity at diagnosis with shifting dominance of 
tumor clones over time and has also identified potential mutations contributing
to myelomagenesis as well as transformation from myeloma to overt extramedullary 
disease such as sPCL.

PMCID: PMC3412329
PMID: 22529291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Genet. 2011 Sep 25;43(11):1082-90. doi: 10.1038/ng.941.

Genome-wide association and large-scale follow up identifies 16 new loci
influencing lung function.

Soler Artigas M, Loth DW, Wain LV, Gharib SA, Obeidat M, Tang W, Zhai G, Zhao JH,
Smith AV, Huffman JE, Albrecht E, Jackson CM, Evans DM, Cadby G, Fornage M,
Manichaikul A, Lopez LM, Johnson T, Aldrich MC, Aspelund T, Barroso I, Campbell
H, Cassano PA, Couper DJ, Eiriksdottir G, Franceschini N, Garcia M, Gieger C,
Gislason GK, Grkovic I, Hammond CJ, Hancock DB, Harris TB, Ramasamy A, Heckbert
SR, Heliövaara M, Homuth G, Hysi PG, James AL, Jankovic S, Joubert BR, Karrasch
S, Klopp N, Koch B, Kritchevsky SB, Launer LJ, Liu Y, Loehr LR, Lohman K, Loos
RJ, Lumley T, Al Balushi KA, Ang WQ, Barr RG, Beilby J, Blakey JD, Boban M,
Boraska V, Brisman J, Britton JR, Brusselle GG, Cooper C, Curjuric I, Dahgam S,
Deary IJ, Ebrahim S, Eijgelsheim M, Francks C, Gaysina D, Granell R, Gu X,
Hankinson JL, Hardy R, Harris SE, Henderson J, Henry A, Hingorani AD, Hofman A,
Holt PG, Hui J, Hunter ML, Imboden M, Jameson KA, Kerr SM, Kolcic I, Kronenberg
F, Liu JZ, Marchini J, McKeever T, Morris AD, Olin AC, Porteous DJ, Postma DS,
Rich SS, Ring SM, Rivadeneira F, Rochat T, Sayer AA, Sayers I, Sly PD, Smith GD, 
Sood A, Starr JM, Uitterlinden AG, Vonk JM, Wannamethee SG, Whincup PH, Wijmenga 
C, Williams OD, Wong A, Mangino M, Marciante KD, McArdle WL, Meibohm B, Morrison 
AC, North KE, Omenaas E, Palmer LJ, Pietiläinen KH, Pin I, Pola Sbreve Ek O,
Pouta A, Psaty BM, Hartikainen AL, Rantanen T, Ripatti S, Rotter JI, Rudan I,
Rudnicka AR, Schulz H, Shin SY, Spector TD, Surakka I, Vitart V, Völzke H,
Wareham NJ, Warrington NM, Wichmann HE, Wild SH, Wilk JB, Wjst M, Wright AF,
Zgaga L, Zemunik T, Pennell CE, Nyberg F, Kuh D, Holloway JW, Boezen HM, Lawlor
DA, Morris RW, Probst-Hensch N; International Lung Cancer Consortium; GIANT
consortium, Kaprio J, Wilson JF, Hayward C, Kähönen M, Heinrich J, Musk AW,
Jarvis DL, Gläser S, Järvelin MR, Ch Stricker BH, Elliott P, O'Connor GT,
Strachan DP, London SJ, Hall IP, Gudnason V, Tobin MD.

Pulmonary function measures reflect respiratory health and are used in the
diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We tested genome-wide
association with forced expiratory volume in 1 second and the ratio of forced
expiratory volume in 1 second to forced vital capacity in 48,201 individuals of
European ancestry with follow up of the top associations in up to an additional
46,411 individuals. We identified new regions showing association (combined P < 5
× 10(-8)) with pulmonary function in or near MFAP2, TGFB2, HDAC4, RARB, MECOM
(also known as EVI1), SPATA9, ARMC2, NCR3, ZKSCAN3, CDC123, C10orf11, LRP1,
CCDC38, MMP15, CFDP1 and KCNE2. Identification of these 16 new loci may provide
insight into the molecular mechanisms regulating pulmonary function and into
molecular targets for future therapy to alleviate reduced lung function.

PMCID: PMC3267376
PMID: 21946350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 17;30(11):1329-40. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.515. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Evidence of a role for the novel zinc-finger transcription factor ZKSCAN3 in
modulating Cyclin D2 expression in multiple myeloma.

Yang L(1), Wang H, Kornblau SM, Graber DA, Zhang N, Matthews JA, Wang M, Weber
DM, Thomas SK, Shah JJ, Zhang L, Lu G, Zhao M, Muddasani R, Yoo SY, Baggerly KA, 
Orlowski RZ.

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, PR China.
yanglin@suda.edu.cn

Dysregulation of cyclin D2 contributes to the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma,
and can occur through translocations that activate MAF/MAFB or MMSET/FGFR3.
However, cyclin D2 induction can also be seen in the absence of such
translocations, such as in patients with hyperdiploid disease, through unknown
mechanisms. In UniGene cluster data-mining and ECgene analysis, we found that
zinc-finger with KRAB and SCAN domains 3 (ZKSCAN3), a novel transcription factor,
is overrepresented in this malignancy, and three consensus ZKSCAN3 binding sites 
were found in the cyclin D2 promoter. Analysis of a panel of myeloma cell lines, 
primary patient samples and datasets from Oncomine and the Multiple Myeloma
Genomics Portal (MMGP) revealed expression of ZKSCAN3 messenger RNA (mRNA) in a
majority of samples. Studies of cell lines by western blotting, and of primary
tissue microarrays by immunohistochemistry, showed ZKSCAN3 protein expression in 
a majority, and in a manner that paralleled messenger levels in cell lines.
ZKSCAN3 overexpression was associated with increased gene copy number or genomic 
DNA gain/amplification in a subset based on analysis of data from the MMGP, and
from fluorescence in situ hybridization studies of cell lines and primary
samples. Overexpression of ZKSCAN3 induced cyclin D2 promoter activity in a
MAF/MAFB-independent manner, and to an extent that was influenced by the number
of consensus ZKSCAN3 binding sites. Moreover, ZKSCAN3 protein expression
correlated with cyclin D2 levels in cell lines and primary samples, and its
overexpression induced cyclin D2. Conversely, ZKSCAN3 suppression using small
hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) reduced cyclin D2 levels, and, importantly, inhibited
myeloma cell line proliferation. Finally, ZKSCAN3 was noted to specifically bind 
to oligonucleotides representing sequences from the cyclin D2 promoter, and to
the endogenous promoter itself in myeloma cells. Taken together, the data support
the conclusion that ZKSCAN3 induction represents a mechanism by which myeloma
cells can induce cyclin D2 dysregulation, and contribute to disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4128235
PMID: 21057542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 12;283(50):35295-304. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806965200. Epub
2008 Oct 21.

Unbiased screening for transcriptional targets of ZKSCAN3 identifies integrin
beta 4 and vascular endothelial growth factor as downstream targets.

Yang L(1), Zhang L, Wu Q, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We previously described the novel zinc finger protein ZKSCAN3 as a new "driver"
of colon cancer progression. To investigate the underlying mechanism and because 
the predicted structural features (tandem zinc fingers) are often present in
transcription factors, we hypothesized that ZKSCAN3 regulates the expression of a
gene(s) favoring tumor progression. We employed unbiased screening to identify a 
DNA binding motif and candidate downstream genes. Cyclic amplification and
selection of targets using a random oligonucleotide library and ZKSCAN3 protein
identified KRDGGG as the DNA recognition motif. In expression profiling, 204
genes were induced 2-29-fold, and 76 genes reduced 2-5-fold by ZKSCAN3. To enrich
for direct targets, we eliminated genes under-represented (<3) for the ZKSCAN3
binding motif (identified by CAST-ing) in 2 kilobases of regulatory sequence.
Up-regulated putative downstream targets included genes contributing to growth
(c-Met-related tyrosine kinase (MST1R), MEK2; the guanine nucleotide exchanger
RasGRP2, insulin-like growth factor-2, integrin beta 4), cell migration (MST1R), 
angiogenesis (vascular endothelial growth factor), and proteolysis (MMP26;
cathepsin D; PRSS3 (protease serine 3)). We pursued integrin beta 4 (induced up
to 6-fold) as a candidate target because it promotes breast cancer tumorigenicity
and stimulates phosphatidyl 3-kinase implicated in colorectal cancer progression.
ZKSCAN3 overexpression/silencing modulated integrin beta 4 expression, confirming
the array analysis. Moreover, ZKSCAN3 bound to the integrin beta 4 promoter in
vitro and in vivo, and the integrin beta 4-derived ZKSCAN3 motif fused upstream
of a tk-Luc reporter conferred ZKSCAN3 sensitivity. Integrin beta 4 knockdown by 
short hairpin RNA countered ZKSCAN3-augmented anchorage-independent colony
formation. We also demonstrate vascular endothelial growth factor as a direct
ZKSCAN3 target. Thus, ZKSCAN3 regulates the expression of several genes favoring 
tumor progression including integrin beta 4.

PMCID: PMC2596387
PMID: 18940803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 1;68(11):4321-30. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0407.

The previously undescribed ZKSCAN3 (ZNF306) is a novel "driver" of colorectal
cancer progression.

Yang L(1), Hamilton SR, Sood A, Kuwai T, Ellis L, Sanguino A, Lopez-Berestein G, 
Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

A relatively new view of colorectal cancer is that its development/progression
reflects the contribution of a large set of altered gene products in varying
combinations, each providing a "fitness advantage." In searching for novel
contributing gene products using Unigene cluster data mining, we found
overrepresentation of expressed sequence tags corresponding to a previously
uncharacterized gene (ZKSCAN3) in colorectal tumors. ZKSCAN3 was pursued for
several reasons: (a) its sequence similarity with bowl required for Drosophila
hindgut development; (b) it lies in a chromosomal region (6p22.1) amplified in
colorectal cancer; and (c) its coding sequence predicts tandem C(2)H(2) zinc
finger domains present in a class of proteins gaining attention for their role in
oncogenesis/tumor progression. Reverse transcription-PCR confirmed overexpression
in colorectal tumor tissue compared with adjacent nonmalignant mucosa due in part
to gene amplification determined by Southern blotting. Further,
immunohistochemistry with an antibody generated to the predicted protein sequence
revealed higher ZKSCAN3 expression in invasive compared with noninvasive tumors. 
Intriguingly, the ZKSCAN3 protein was also expressed in tumors wild-type for
genes (APC, p53, K-Ras) commonly targeted in colorectal cancer. ZKSCAN3 knockdown
in two independent colon cancer cell lines impaired anchorage-independent growth 
and orthotopic tumor growth, whereas overexpression in a third cell line had the 
opposite effect and increased 5-fluorouracil resistance. Liposomal delivery of a 
ZKSCAN3-targeting small interfering RNA reduced tumorigenicity of orthotopic
colon cancer. Thus, the hitherto uncharacterized ZKSCAN3 adds to an expanding set
of encoded products contributing to the progression of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 18519692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


