
1. Genomics. 1993 Mar;15(3):621-5.

A novel zinc finger cDNA with a polymorphic pentanucleotide repeat (ATTTT)n maps 
on human chromosome 19p.

Chen H(1), Kalaitsidaki M, Warren AC, Avramopoulos D, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287.

To isolate genes that contain zinc finger motifs, a human brain cDNA library was 
screened with an oligonucleotide complementary to the conserved "linker" sequence
between adjacent zinc fingers. The insert of one positive clone of 1226
nucleotides contained a novel open reading frame (ZNF121) with 9 zinc finger
motifs; in addition, 10 repeats of the pentanucleotide sequence (ATTTT) were
found 223 nucleotides after a stop codon and were followed by an Alu repeat. A
sequence-tagged site of 172 nucleotides containing this repeat was defined by two
oligonucleotide primers, mapped to chromosome 19 using commercially available
mapping panels of hybrid cell lines, and designated D19S204. The pentanucleotide 
repeat was polymorphic in the members of CEPH families, with 7 alleles ranging in
size from 147 to 197 nucleotides. The observed heterozygosity in unrelated CEPH
parents was 58% (46 of 79). Genotypes from 34 informative CEPH families were used
to perform linkage analyses with other polymorphic markers contained in the CEPH 
V5 database; strong linkage was found with markers on the short arm of chromosome
19. The zinc finger cDNA described here maps in an area where other zinc finger
sequences and multiple cosmid clones containing zinc fingers have been previously
localized. The ease of scoring these polymorphic alleles indicates that
pentanucleotide repeat polymorphisms may be a particularly useful class of DNA
markers for linkage studies.

PMID: 8468057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


