
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 25;9(8):e105836. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105836.
eCollection 2014.

RNA-sequencing analysis of HepG2 cells treated with atorvastatin.

Stormo C(1), Kringen MK(2), Lyle R(3), Olstad OK(1), Sachse D(4), Berg JP(5),
Piehler AP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo,
Norway. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo,
Norway. (3)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (5)Department of Medical
Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway; Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Fürst Medical Laboratory, Oslo, Norway.

The cholesterol-lowering drug atorvastatin is among the most prescribed drug in
the world. Alternative splicing in a number of genes has been reported to be
associated with variable statin response. RNA-seq has proven to be a powerful
technique for genome-wide splice variant analysis. In the present study, we
sought to investigate atorvastatin responsive splice variants in HepG2 cells
using RNA-seq analysis to identify novel candidate genes implicated in
cholesterol homeostasis and in the statin response. HepG2 cells were treated with
10 µM atorvastatin for 24 hours. RNA-seq and exon array analyses were performed. 
The validation of selected genes was performed using Taqman gene expression
assays. RNA-seq analysis identified 121 genes and 98 specific splice variants, of
which four were minor splice variants to be differentially expressed, 11 were
genes with potential changes in their splicing patterns (SYCP3, ZNF195, ZNF674,
MYD88, WHSC1, KIF16B, ZNF92, AGER, FCHO1, SLC6A12 and AKAP9), and one was a gene 
(RAP1GAP) with differential promoter usage. The IL21R transcript was detected to 
be differentially expressed via RNA-seq and RT-qPCR, but not in the exon array.
In conclusion, several novel candidate genes that are affected by atorvastatin
treatment were identified in this study. Further studies are needed to determine 
the biological significance of the atorvastatin responsive splice variants that
have been uniquely identified using RNA-seq.

PMCID: PMC4143339
PMID: 25153832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Mar 15;7(4):1514-23. eCollection 2014.

DNA microarray reveals ZNF195 and SBF1 are potential biomarkers for gemcitabine
sensitivity in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines.

Zhu MH(1), Ji SL(1), Zhang CY(1), Cui L(1), Xiong L(1), Zheng HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Changhai Hospital,
Second Military Medical University Shanghai, China.

Gemcitabine is a potential chemotherapy drug for treatment of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), however, the poor or partial response of HNSCC
patients to gemcitabine demonstrated the urgent need for gemcitabine biomarkers
to improve the therapy. In present work, 10 HNSCC cell lines were employed to
figure out the biomarkers for gemcitabine sensitivity. The sensitivities of these
10 cell lines to gemcitabine and the basal expression of these cell lines was
investigated, the correlation between gemcitabine response (IC50 dose) and gene
expression was investigated by Pearson correlation and FDR estimation. The top
seven positive genes responsible for gemcitabine sensitivity were validated by
qPCR in these 10 HNSCC cell lines, while only two genes (SBF1 and ZNF195) were
expression-correlated to gemcitabine response. Furthermore, ZNF195 expression was
closely associated with gemcitabine sensitivity in the subsequent independent
validation in cell lines from various types of cancer. Our work might provide
potential biomarkers for gemcitabine sensitivity in HNSCC and various type of
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4014231
PMID: 24817947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Apr 1;22(7):1136-46. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0369. Epub 2013
Jan 4.

Transforming pluripotency: an exon-level study of malignancy-specific transcripts
in human embryonal carcinoma and embryonic stem cells.

Alagaratnam S(1), Harrison N, Bakken AC, Hoff AM, Jones M, Sveen A, Moore HD,
Andrews PW, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

To circumvent difficulties of isolating pure populations of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) for the purpose of identifying malignancy-specific gene expression, we
have compared exon-resolution transcriptomic profiles of 5 embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cell lines, a histological subtype of germ cell tumor (GCT), to their
nonmalignant caricature, specifically 6 human embryonic stem (ES) cell lines.
Both cell types are readily accessible, and were purified for undifferentiated
cells only. We identified a set of 28 differentially expressed genes, many of
which had cancer and stemness roles. Overexpression of the recently discovered
pluripotency gene NR5A2 in malignant EC cells revealed an intriguing indication
of how WNT-mediated dysregulation of pluripotency is involved with malignancy.
Expression of these 28 genes was further explored within 2 publically available
data sets of primary EC tumors and normal testis. At the exon-level, alternative 
splicing events were detected in ZNF195, DNMT3B, and PMF1, and alternative
promoters were detected for ASH2L and ETV5. These events were validated by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction-based methods in EC and ES lines,
where the alternative splicing event in the de novo DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B 
may have functional consequences. In conclusion, we have identified
malignancy-specific gene expression differences within a rigorous pluripotent
stem cell context. These findings are of particular interest for both GCT and ES 
cell biology, and, in general, to the concept of CSCs.

PMID: 23137282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Exp Dermatol. 2008 Apr;17(4):324-34. Epub 2007 Nov 2.

Identification of selectively expressed genes and antigens in CTCL.

Hartmann TB(1), Mattern E, Wiedemann N, van Doorn R, Willemze R, Niikura T,
Hildenbrand R, Schadendorf D, Eichmüller SB.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Skin Cancer Unit, Heidelberg, Germany.

The knowledge of tumor-associated antigens is required for most types of
immunotherapy and can substantially facilitate diagnosis. To identify potential
tumor-associated genes expressed in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), we used
three complementary strategies: antigens which elicit a humoral immune response
in CTCL patients were detected by serological analysis of a recombinant cDNA
expression library. cDNAs differentially expressed in CTCL but not peripheral
blood monocytes were identified by comparative cDNA hybridization and suppression
subtractive hybridization. We identified 43 genes selectively expressed by CTCL
cells, that have not yet been described in the context of CTCL development, but
most of which had been reported to be associated with cancer. Expression analysis
by database mining and subsequently RT-PCR on selected clones confirmed their
selective expression in CTCL tissues. Serological tests showed that 15 clones
were recognized by sera of CTCL patients but not of healthy donors. Analysis of
serological tests for 11 clones using serum antibody detection array (SADA) and
100 sera of controls and CTCL patients each revealed up to 5% reactive sera in
the tumor group. The expression pattern of the detected clones and their
immunogenicity demonstrates that they might be relevant for the understanding of 
CTCL and suggests particularly three clones, HD-CL-41 (DRAK2), HD-CL-49 (nudC)
and HD-CL-12 (ZNF195) for further analysis with respect to their prognostic and
therapeutic value for CTCL.

PMID: 17979976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Gene. 1999 Oct 18;239(1):99-107.

HERV-F (XA34) is a full-length human endogenous retrovirus expressed in placental
and fetal tissues.

Kjellman C(1), Sjögren HO, Salford LG, Widegren B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Lund, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Sweden.

The complete sequence of XA34 was identified from a 107 kb genomic clone
originating from the human chromosome 7q31.1-q31.3. The 7.1 kb human endogenous
retrovirus (HERV) contains LTR's, gag, pol and env, and a pol sequence which is
identical to the 2.3 kb XA34 cDNA clone which we previously isolated from a human
glioma cDNA library (Widegren et al., 1996). The HERV is located in a reversed
orientation within an intron-sequence of a gene similar to mouse adseverin(D5).
The gag and protease regions are intact. However, the pol and env regions are
truncated by a deletion which removes the C-terminal end of the integrase and the
complete surface protein. The HERV sequence is bordered by a five base-pair
direct repeat and has the TG...CA structure. Over the complete HERV genome, XA34 
is very similar to members of the HERV-F family and shares the same primer
binding site which is homologous to phenylalanine (F) tRNA. Therefore, XA34 is
termed HERV-F(XA34). HERV-F(XA34) has an open reading frame (ORF) of 1000 bp in
the gag region which starts with Met-Gly in a favorable context and stops in the 
capsid protein. A strong mRNA expression of HERV-F(XA34) is demonstrated in
placental tissue, mainly residing in two transcripts of approximately 7.5 and
8.5-9 kb respectively. Analyses of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) have identified
the expression of HERV-F(XA34) sequences in placental tissue, fetal liver/spleen,
olfactory epithelium and in an epithelial skin tumor. EST analysis has also
identified splice variants of HERV-F(XA34), in which the gag, pol and most of the
env regions are spliced out. These splice variants contain a short ORF encoded in
the region from the C-terminal portion of env to the 3'-LTR. In addition, ESTs
identical to HERV-Fb have been identified in retinal, fetal liver/spleen and
brain tissue as well as Jurkat cells. The analyses indicate that the 5'-LTR of
HERV-Fb may function as an alternative poly A site of a Krüppel related zinc
finger gene (ZNF195).

PMID: 10571039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Gen Virol. 1999 Sep;80 ( Pt 9):2383-92.

HERV-F, a new group of human endogenous retrovirus sequences.

Kjellman C(1), Sjögren HO, Widegren B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Lund, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Sweden.
Christian.Kjellman@wblab.lu.se

Using primers from a conserved region of the XA34 human endogenous retrovirus
(HERV) family, four pol fragments originating from new members of the family were
amplified from human genomic DNA. Southern blot analysis demonstrated similar
hybridization patterns in human, chimpanzee and orangutan and distinct
hybridization to macaque DNA. The probes also exhibited weaker hybridization to
squirrel monkey DNA. Using large genomic clones, two full-length XA34-related
HERVs have been identified. One of the HERVs is located downstream of a human
Krüppel-related zinc finger protein gene, ZNF195. Both of the newly identified
long terminal repeats have potential TATA boxes, poly(A) signals and
transcription factor-binding sites but they differ to a high degree, especially
in the U3 region. The primer-binding sites were found to be homologous to
tRNA(Phe) (TTC), and therefore these new HERVs have been given the name HERV-F.
The closest relatives to the HERV-Fs are the RTVLH-RGH family. Phylogenetic
analyses of the Gag, Pol and Env regions are discussed. Both of the newly
identified HERV-Fs were shown to contain protease, reverse transcriptase,
integrase and env regions and had characteristic deletions in the integrase and
env regions. In addition, the capsid protein gene of gag and two conserved
zinc-binding motifs that are characteristic of a potential nucleic acid-binding
protein were also identified. Apart from an ORF spanning the protease of one
HERV-F, no other longer ORFs were found.

PMID: 10501491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jul;8(7):1337-52.

Multipoint analysis of human chromosome 11p15/mouse distal chromosome 7:
inclusion of H19/IGF2 in the minimal WT2 region, gene specificity of H19
silencing in Wilms' tumorigenesis and methylation hyper-dependence of H19
imprinting.

Dao D(1), Walsh CP, Yuan L, Gorelov D, Feng L, Hensle T, Nisen P, Yamashiro DJ,
Bestor TH, Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia Univesity 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

WT2 is defined by maternal-specific loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome
11p15.5 in Wilms' tumors (WTs). The imprinted H19 gene, in this region, is
silenced and hypermethylated in most WTs, and this is linked to pathological
biallelic expression of IGF2. However, H19 and IGF2 lie within a larger imprinted
domain, and the gene specificity of H19 epimutation has been a persistent
question. To address this, we assessed LOH, gene expression and DNA methylation
at multiple sites in and around the imprinted domain. LOH mapping showed that the
entire domain, including IGF2/H19, is within the minimal WT2 region. Genes within
the domain, including IPL/TSSC3/BWR1C, IMPT1/ORCTL2/BWR1A/TSSC5, KvLQT1/KCNA9 and
TAPA1/CD81, as well as the zinc finger gene ZNF195/ZNFP104 near the centromeric
border, were expressed persistently in many WTs. DNA hypermethylation was not
detected with 5" upstream probes for IPL, IMPT1, KvLQT1 and ZNF195 in WTs or
WT-associated kidneys. Fully developed WTs showed variable hypomethylation at an 
imprinted CpG island in a KvLQT1 intron, but this was only complete in the cases 
with LOH and was not observed in pre-neoplastic WT-associated kidneys with H19
epimutation. Analysis of the corresponding region of mouse chromosome 7 using
methyltransferase-hypomorphic mice showed that the H19 imprint was fully erased, 
but that the allelic bias at Ipl, Impt1, p57 Kip2 and, to a lesser extent,
Kvlqt1, persisted. Pre-existing massive allelic asymmetry for DNA methylation and
hyper-dependence of transcription on methylation status may underlie the
mechanism of gene-specific silencing of H19 in Wilms' tumorigenesis.

PMID: 10369881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Genomics. 1997 Oct 15;45(2):451-5.

Characterization of a KRAB family zinc finger gene, ZNF195, mapping to chromosome
band 11p15.5.

Hussey DJ(1), Parker NJ, Hussey ND, Little PF, Dobrovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology-Oncology, University of Adelaide Department of
Medicine, Woodville, South Australia, 5011, Australia.

We report the cDNA sequence of the zinc finger gene, ZNF195, which maps to
chromosome 11p15.5. ZNF195 contains an N-terminal KRAB domain and 14 tandemly
repeated Krüppel type zinc finger motifs at its C-terminus. Northern analysis
shows expression of ZNF195 in adult heart, brain, placenta, skeletal muscle, and 
pancreas with a predominant transcript size of 4.3 kb. There is little expression
in adult lung, liver, and kidney. In fetal lung, liver, kidney, and brain, the
predominant transcript is 3.5 kb. Fetal brain also expresses a 4.3-kb transcript.
RT-PCR analysis shows that two exons, 4a, which contains an inverted Alu
sequence, and 4b, are differentially spliced and absent from the major
transcript.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9344677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


