
1. Biochem J. 2014 Feb 15;458(1):171-83. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130628.

ZNF16 (HZF1) promotes erythropoiesis and megakaryocytopoiesis via regulation of
the c-KIT gene.

Chen J(1), Li XB(1), Su R(1), Song L(1), Wang F(1), Zhang JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Key State Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100005, China.

We previously characterized the zinc finger protein gene HZF1 [also known as
ZNF16 (zinc finger protein 16)] and demonstrated its important roles in erythroid
and megakaryocytic differentiation of K562 cells. In the present study, we
investigated its effect on erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation of HSPCs 
(haemopoietic stem/progenitor cells). We observed up-regulation of ZNF16 during
erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation of the CD34+ HSPCs, and demonstrated
that ZNF16 promotes erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation by
gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments. Using a luciferase reporter
and ChIP assays ZNF16 was demonstrated to bind to the c-KIT gene promoter and
inhibit its expression in K562 cells. Enforced expression and knockdown of ZNF16 
down-regulated and up-regulated the expression of the c-KIT gene in K562 cells
and HSPCs respectively. Significantly decreased levels of the c-Kit protein were 
observed following erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation of K562 and CD34+
cells. The knockdown of c-KIT partially rescued the differentiation inhibition
caused by ZNF16 knockdown. The knockdown of c-KIT also blocked the activity of
the c-Raf/MEK [MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase)/ERK
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) kinase]/ERK/c-Jun signal pathway and
reduced further the level of HEY1 (hes-related family bHLH transcription factor
with YRPW motif 1), a repressor of GATA1 (GATA-binding protein 1) transcription, 
which finally up-regulated the expression of GATA1, a central regulator of
erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation. In conclusion the results of the
present study demonstrate that ZNF16 plays an important role in erythropoiesis
and megakaryocytopoiesis via its regulation of the
c-Kit/c-Raf/MEK/ERK/c-Jun/HEY1/GATA1 cascade.

PMID: 24180487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Nov-Dec;4(6):1131-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.564. Epub 2011 Aug
22.

Zinc finger protein HZF1 promotes K562 cell proliferation by interacting with and
inhibiting INCA1.

Li XB(1), Chen J, Deng MJ, Wang F, Du ZW, Zhang JW.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, PR China.

Previously, we characterized a zinc finger protein gene HZF1 (ZNF16) and
demonstrated that it played a significant role in the erythroid and
megakaryocytic differentiation of K562 cells by knockdown of the gene. In this
study, we examined the effect of HZF1 on the proliferation and apoptosis of K562 
cells and identified the possible mechanism for this effect. By
lentivirus-mediated gene transfer, we obtained stable K562 transductants with
HZF1 overexpression (K562/WPXL-HZF1) and stable control transductants
(K562/WPXL). Significantly rapid cell amplification was observed in
K562/WPXL-HZF1 cells compared to K562/WPXL cells. The cell cycles of the two
transductants were analyzed and the results demonstrated that HZF1 overexpression
promoted the S to G2/M phase transition. Additionally, we found that the
overexpression of HZF1 slightly inhibits the apoptosis of K562 cells induced by
sodium arsenate. Furthermore, using a yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) system we identified
the HZF1-interacting proteins and screened 29 potential binding partners of HZF1.
Using a co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay, we confirmed the interaction
between HZF1 and the inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) interacting with 
cyclin A1 (INCA1), and proved that this interaction leads to the inhibition of
INCA1 function, which rescued the activity of CDK2 inhibited by INCA1. In
conclusion, our results identified novel functions of the HZF1 gene and revealed 
a possible mechanism through which HZF1 affects K562 cell proliferation.

PMID: 21874239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. BMC Genomics. 2010 Mar 26;11:206. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-206.

The ancient mammalian KRAB zinc finger gene cluster on human chromosome 8q24.3
illustrates principles of C2H2 zinc finger evolution associated with unique
expression profiles in human tissues.

Lorenz P(1), Dietmann S, Wilhelm T, Koczan D, Autran S, Gad S, Wen G, Ding G, Li 
Y, Rousseau-Merck MF, Thiesen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Rostock, Schillingallee 70, 18055
Rostock, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Expansion of multi-C2H2 domain zinc finger (ZNF) genes, including the
Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) subfamily, paralleled the evolution of tetrapodes, 
particularly in mammalian lineages. Advances in their cataloging and
characterization suggest that the functions of the KRAB-ZNF gene family
contributed to mammalian speciation.
RESULTS: Here, we characterized the human 8q24.3 ZNF cluster on the genomic, the 
phylogenetic, the structural and the transcriptome level. Six (ZNF7, ZNF34,
ZNF250, ZNF251, ZNF252, ZNF517) of the seven locus members contain exons encoding
KRAB domains, one (ZNF16) does not. They form a paralog group in which the
encoded KRAB and ZNF protein domains generally share more similarities with each 
other than with other members of the human ZNF superfamily. The closest relatives
with respect to their DNA-binding domain were ZNF7 and ZNF251. The analysis of
orthologs in therian mammalian species revealed strong conservation and purifying
selection of the KRAB-A and zinc finger domains. These findings underscore
structural/functional constraints during evolution. Gene losses in the murine
lineage (ZNF16, ZNF34, ZNF252, ZNF517) and potential protein truncations in
primates (ZNF252) illustrate ongoing speciation processes. Tissue expression
profiling by quantitative real-time PCR showed similar but distinct patterns for 
all tested ZNF genes with the most prominent expression in fetal brain. Based on 
accompanying expression signatures in twenty-six other human tissues ZNF34 and
ZNF250 revealed the closest expression profiles. Together, the 8q24.3 ZNF genes
can be assigned to a cerebellum, a testis or a prostate/thyroid subgroup. These
results are consistent with potential functions of the ZNF genes in morphogenesis
and differentiation. Promoter regions of the seven 8q24.3 ZNF genes display
common characteristics like missing TATA-box, CpG island-association and
transcription factor binding site (TFBS) modules. Common TFBS modules partly
explain the observed expression pattern similarities.
CONCLUSIONS: The ZNF genes at human 8q24.3 form a relatively old mammalian
paralog group conserved in eutherian mammals for at least 130 million years. The 
members persisted after initial duplications by undergoing subfunctionalizations 
in their expression patterns and target site recognition. KRAB-ZNF mediated
repression of transcription might have shaped organogenesis in mammalian
ontogeny.

PMCID: PMC2865497
PMID: 20346131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Biotechnol. 2010 Feb;44(2):83-9. doi: 10.1007/s12033-009-9210-8. Epub 2009
Sep 15.

Identification of the trans-activation domain and the nuclear location signals of
human zinc finger protein HZF1 (ZNF16).

Deng MJ(1), Li XB, Peng H, Zhang JW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing, People's Republic of
China.

We previously characterized a C2H2-type zinc finger protein HZF1 (ZNF16) and
demonstrated its important role in erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation. 
This protein was located in nucleus. In this study, we first approved that HZF1
solely could activate lacZ reporter gene in yeast host Y190. This self-activation
phenomenon together with structure and distribution of HZF1 suggested it as a
potential transcription factor. By the auto-activation experiments and the
luciferase reporter system and deletion mutation analysis, we further located the
trans-activation domain at amino acid residences 49-197 within the non-zinc
finger region of HZF1. An acidic residue-rich subregion (amino acids 49-105) was 
important for the trans-activation effect, but it could not function
independently. By deletion mutation analysis, we also identified three nuclear
location signals, which were located in the regions of amino acids 255-280,
328-360, and 460-490, respectively, and all of them within the zinc finger
region.

PMID: 19763908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cancer Res. 1994 Aug 1;54(15):4183-7.

A homozygous deletion in a small cell lung cancer cell line involving a 3p21
region with a marked instability in yeast artificial chromosomes.

Kok K(1), van den Berg A, Veldhuis PM, van der Veen AY, Franke M, Schoenmakers
EF, Hulsbeek MM, van der Hout AH, de Leij L, van de Ven W, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

All types of lung carcinoma are characterized by a high frequency of loss of
sequences from the short arm of chromosome 3, the smallest region of overlap
containing D3F15S2 in band p21. Here we characterize a 440-kilobase segment from 
this region, which we found homozygously deleted in one of our small cell lung
cancer-derived cell lines. The homozygous deletion maps between UBE1L and ZnF16, 
just centromeric to D3F15S2. Yeast artificial chromosomes with inserts
originating from the deleted region are very unstable and readily lose parts of
their insert.

PMID: 8033151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


