
1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2012;2012:721313. doi: 10.1100/2012/721313. Epub 2012 Jun
4.

Correlation of dynamic PET and gene array data in patients with gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors.

Strauss LG(1), Dimitrakopoulou-Strauss A, Koczan D, Pan L, Hohenberger P.

Author information: 
(1)Medical PET Group, Biological Imaging, CCU Nuclear Medicine, German Cancer
Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. lgs@ads-lgs.de

INTRODUCTION: The results obtained with dynamic PET (dPET) were compared to gene 
expression data obtained in patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST).
The primary aim was to assess the association of the dPET results and gene
expression data.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: dPET was performed following the injection of
F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in 22 patients with GIST. All patients were
examined prior to surgery for staging purpose. Compartment and noncompartment
models were used for the quantitative evaluation of the dPET examinations. Gene
array data were based on tumor specimen obtained by surgery after the PET
examinations.
RESULTS: The data analysis revealed significant correlations for the dPET
parameters and the expression of zinc finger genes (znf43, znf85, znf91, znf189).
Furthermore, the transport of FDG (k1) was associated with VEGF-A. The cell cycle
gene cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1C was correlated with the maximum tracer 
uptake (SUVmax) in the tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: The data demonstrate a dependency of the tracer kinetics on genes
associated with prognosis in GIST. Furthermore, angiogenesis and cell
proliferation have an impact on the tracer uptake.

PMCID: PMC3373132
PMID: 22701369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 9;5(7):e11493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011493.

Maternal genes and facial clefts in offspring: a comprehensive search for genetic
associations in two population-based cleft studies from Scandinavia.

Jugessur A(1), Shi M, Gjessing HK, Lie RT, Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, Christensen K,
Boyles AL, Daack-Hirsch S, Nguyen TT, Christiansen L, Lidral AC, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Fetal conditions can in principle be affected by the mother's
genotype working through the prenatal environment.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genotypes for 1536 SNPs in 357 cleft candidate
genes were available from a previous analysis in which we focused on fetal gene
effects. After data-cleaning, genotypes for 1315 SNPs in 334 autosomal genes were
available for the current analysis of maternal gene effects. Two complementary
statistical methods, TRIMM and HAPLIN, were used to detect multi-marker effects
in population-based samples from Norway (562 case-parent and 592 control-parent
triads) and Denmark (235 case-parent triads). We analyzed isolated cleft lip with
or without cleft palate (iCL/P) and isolated cleft palate only (iCP) separately
and assessed replication by looking for genes detected in both populations by
both methods. In iCL/P, neither TRIMM nor HAPLIN detected more genes than
expected by chance alone; furthermore, the selected genes were not replicated
across the two methods. In iCP, however, FLNB was identified by both methods in
both populations. Although HIC1 and ZNF189 did not fully satisfy our stringency
criterion for replication, they were strongly associated with iCP in TRIMM
analyses of the Norwegian triads.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Except for FLNB, HIC1 and ZNF189, maternal genes did not
appear to influence the risk of clefting in our data. This is consistent with
recent epidemiological findings showing no apparent difference between
mother-to-offspring and father-to-offspring recurrence of clefts in these two
populations. It is likely that fetal genes make the major genetic contribution to
clefting risk in these populations, but we cannot rule out the possibility that
maternal genes can affect risk through interactions with specific teratogens or
fetal genes.

PMCID: PMC2901336
PMID: 20634891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Pathol. 2001 May;194(1):76-80.

The chromosome 9q genes TGFBR1, TSC1, and ZNF189 are rarely mutated in bladder
cancer.

van Tilborg AA(1), de Vries A, Zwarthoff EC.

Author information: 
(1)Josephine Nefkens Institute, Department of Pathology, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

This study assessed a series of bladder tumours and bladder tumour cell lines for
sequence variation in the Krüppel-like zinc finger gene ZNF189, the tuberous
sclerosis complex gene 1 (TSC1), and the TGF beta receptor type I (TGFBR1). All
three genes have been mapped to 9q regions commonly deleted in transitional cell 
carcinoma of the bladder. Mutation analysis of the coding sequence of these genes
revealed several variant bands that were shown to represent polymorphisms.
Mutation analysis of the ZNF189 gene in bladder cancer cell lines identified one 
amino acid substitution (lysine-->isoleucine) at position 323 in exon 4. For the 
TSC1 gene, two mutations were identified in two out of 27 independent cell lines.
Both mutations result in a truncated protein. Furthermore, one out of 36 bladder 
tumours had a frameshift mutation in exon 7 of the TSC1 gene. No tumour-specific 
mutations were found in the TGFBR1 gene. The length of the polyalanine tract
present in exon 1 of the TGFBR1 gene was also investigated. It has been suggested
that the allele with six alanines (6A) is more frequent in patients with bladder 
and other cancers, so bladder cancer patients were compared with normal controls.
In both groups, the percentage of heterozygotes was 17%. These data do not
support a role for the 6A allele in bladder cancer susceptibility.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11329144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Gene. 1999 Jul 22;235(1-2):103-9.

Context-dependent Taq-polymerase-mediated nucleotide alterations, as revealed by 
direct sequencing of the ZNF189 gene: implications for mutation detection.

Odeberg J(1), Ahmadian A, Williams C, Uhlén M, Pontén F, Lundeberg J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Teknikringen
30, S-10044, Stockholm, Sweden.

We have recently reported on the genetic organisation of a novel Krüppel-like
zinc finger, ZNF189, located to 9q22-q31. In that study we found no mutations in 
the coding sequence when using ZNF189 as a candidate gene for sporadic basal cell
cancer and squamous cell cancer. Here, by direct sequencing of the proximal
promotor of ZNF189, mutations were found to appear in a small hot-spot region in 
over 50% of analysed tumour samples, the majority being G to A substitutions. The
hot-spot region spans a 24bp G-rich region. Repeated analyses of the original
sample lysates fail to confirm each of these mutations; and frequently new
mutations appear at neighbouring positions. Subsequent analysis with serial
dilutions of genomic DNA and a cosmid harbouring the wild-type ZNF189 gene
demonstrate that these sequence-specific alterations arise in the outer
PCR-amplification when 50 copies or less of template are used. Although the
mechanism of how these context-specific alterations arise is not proven, the
results demonstrate a previously unreported type of PCR-mediated
sequence-specific alteration that easily could have been interpreted as being of 
clinical relevance. The phenomena observed show that mutations detected by direct
sequencing can be caused by PCR-introduced alterations. Consequently, this should
be of general caution in mutation analysis of disease gene candidates when using 
small amounts of template, such as microdissected biopsies.

PMID: 10415338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genomics. 1998 Jun 1;50(2):213-21.

Cloning and characterization of ZNF189, a novel human Krüppel-like zinc finger
gene localized to chromosome 9q22-q31.

Odeberg J(1), Røsok O, Gudmundsson GH, Ahmadian A, Roshani L, Williams C, Larsson
C, Pontén F, Uhlén M, Asheim HC, Lundeberg J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm,
Sweden.

A 3-kb-long cDNA encoding a Krüppel-like human zinc finger protein was isolated
and mapped to chromosome 9q22-q31. The ZNF189 gene encodes a protein with 16 zinc
fingers at its C-terminus and belongs to the Krüppel-associated box
(KRAB)-containing group of zinc finger proteins. Four differently spliced cDNA
transcripts, differing at the 5' coding region where a KRAB A repressor domain is
encoded, were isolated. In addition, Northern blot analysis indicates the
presence of two additional unidentified splice variants. Comparison of cDNA and
genomic sequences shows that the ZNF189 gene spans approximately 11 kb and is
organized into at least four exons, the large 3'-end exon coding for the complete
zinc finger domain and the 3' untranslated region. ZNF189 is expressed in all
tissues and cell types currently investigated, at varying levels, but with a
tissue- or cell-type-restricted expression pattern for the different splice
variants. ZNF189 is conserved in the genome of several mammalian species. Direct 
sequencing of the ZNF189 gene in microdissected tumor biopsies of sporadic basal 
cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma reveals no mutations in the coding
sequence or at exon/intron boundaries.

PMID: 9653648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


