
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;35(24):4135-46. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00477-15. Epub 2015 Sep 
28.

Genomic Determinants of THAP11/ZNF143/HCFC1 Complex Recruitment to Chromatin.

Vinckevicius A(1), Parker JB(2), Chakravarti D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Science in Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, USA Driskill Graduate Program in Life Sciences, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (2)Division of
Reproductive Science in Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Division of Reproductive Science in Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, USA Driskill Graduate Program in Life Sciences, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA Department of
Pharmacology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, USA Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA debu@northwestern.edu.

The THAP11 and ZNF143 transcription factors recognize overlapping DNA sequences
and are reported to exhibit signs of both competitive and cooperative binding.
HCFC1 serves as a scaffold protein, bridging interactions between transcription
factors, including THAP11 and ZNF143, and transcriptional coregulators. The exact
mechanism of how DNA sequences guide the recruitment of the THAP11/ZNF143/HCFC1
complex to chromatin is still controversial. In this study, we use chromosomally 
integrated synthetic constructs and clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeat (CRISPR)-Cas9-mediated approaches in intact cells to elucidate
the role of the DNA sequence in the recruitment of this complex and to establish 
its biological relevance. We show that the ACTACA submotif, shared by both THAP11
and ZNF143, directs the recruitment of THAP11 and HCFC1 to ZNF143-occupied loci. 
Importantly, its position, spacing, and orientation relative to the ZNF143 core
motif are critical for this action. CRISPR-Cas9-mediated alterations of the
ACTACA submotif at endogenous promoters recapitulated results obtained with
synthetic constructs and resulted in altered gene transcription and histone
modifications at targeted promoters. Our in vivo approaches provide strong
evidence for the molecular role of the ACTACA submotif in THAP11, ZNF143, and
HCFC1 cooperative recruitment to chromatin and its biological role in target gene
expression.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4648815 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26416877  [PubMed - in process]


2. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 15;16(1):691. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1883-8.

Transcriptome analysis of complex I-deficient patients reveals distinct
expression programs for subunits and assembly factors of the oxidative
phosphorylation system.

van der Lee R(1), Szklarczyk R(2,)(3), Smeitink J(4), Smeets HJ(5), Huynen MA(6),
Vogel R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Robin.vanderLee@radboudumc.nl. (2)Centre for Molecular
and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (3)Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Unit Clinical Genomics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 6200 MD, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(4)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 
9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. jan.smeitink@radboudumc.nl. (5)Unit
Clinical Genomics, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, School for Growth and
Development and for Cardiovascular Research, Maastricht University Medical
Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands. bert.smeets@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(6)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Martijn.Huijnen@radboudumc.nl. (7)Nijmegen Center for 
Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. rutger.vogel@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptional control of mitochondrial metabolism is essential for 
cellular function. A better understanding of this process will aid the
elucidation of mitochondrial disorders, in particular of the many genetically
unsolved cases of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) deficiency. Yet, to date
only few studies have investigated nuclear gene regulation in the context of
OXPHOS deficiency. In this study we performed RNA sequencing of two control and
two complex I-deficient patient cell lines cultured in the presence of compounds 
that perturb mitochondrial metabolism: chloramphenicol, AICAR, or resveratrol. We
combined this with a comprehensive analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear gene
expression patterns, co-expression calculations and transcription factor binding 
sites.
RESULTS: Our analyses show that subsets of mitochondrial OXPHOS genes respond
opposingly to chloramphenicol and AICAR, whereas the response of nuclear OXPHOS
genes is less consistent between cell lines and treatments. Across all samples
nuclear OXPHOS genes have a significantly higher co-expression with each other
than with other genes, including those encoding mitochondrial proteins. We found 
no evidence for complex-specific mRNA expression regulation: subunits of
different OXPHOS complexes are similarly (co-)expressed and regulated by a common
set of transcription factors. However, we did observe significant differences
between the expression of nuclear genes for OXPHOS subunits versus assembly
factors, suggesting divergent transcription programs. Furthermore, complex I
co-expression calculations identified 684 genes with a likely role in OXPHOS
biogenesis and function. Analysis of evolutionarily conserved transcription
factor binding sites in the promoters of these genes revealed almost all known
OXPHOS regulators (including GABP, NRF1/2, SP1, YY1, E-box factors) and a set of 
novel candidates (ELK1, KLF7, SP4, EHF, ZNF143, and TEL2).
CONCLUSIONS: OXPHOS genes share an expression program distinct from other genes
encoding mitochondrial proteins, indicative of targeted nuclear regulation of a
mitochondrial sub-process. Within the subset of OXPHOS genes we established a
difference in expression between mitochondrial and nuclear genes, and between
nuclear genes encoding subunits and assembly factors. Most transcription
regulators of genes that co-express with complex I are well-established factors
for OXPHOS biogenesis. For the remaining six factors we here suggest for the
first time a link with transcription regulation in OXPHOS deficiency.

PMCID: PMC4570683
PMID: 26369791  [PubMed - in process]


3. Bioinformatics. 2015 Oct 1;31(19):3092-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv336.
Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Mango: a bias-correcting ChIA-PET analysis pipeline.

Phanstiel DH(1), Boyle AP(2), Heidari N(1), Snyder MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305 and. (2)Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

MOTIVATION: Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag sequencing
(ChIA-PET) is an established method for detecting genome-wide looping
interactions at high resolution. Current ChIA-PET analysis software packages
either fail to correct for non-specific interactions due to genomic proximity or 
only address a fraction of the steps required for data processing. We present
Mango, a complete ChIA-PET data analysis pipeline that provides statistical
confidence estimates for interactions and corrects for major sources of bias
including differential peak enrichment and genomic proximity.
RESULTS: Comparison to the existing software packages, ChIA-PET Tool and ChiaSig 
revealed that Mango interactions exhibit much better agreement with
high-resolution Hi-C data. Importantly, Mango executes all steps required for
processing ChIA-PET datasets, whereas ChiaSig only completes 20% of the required 
steps. Application of Mango to multiple available ChIA-PET datasets permitted the
independent rediscovery of known trends in chromatin loops including enrichment
of CTCF, RAD21, SMC3 and ZNF143 at the anchor regions of interactions and strong 
bias for convergent CTCF motifs.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Mango is open source and distributed through
github at https://github.com/dphansti/mango.
CONTACT: mpsnyder@standford.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4592333 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26034063  [PubMed - in process]


4. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 9;6:6793. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7793.

Whole-exome SNP array identifies 15 new susceptibility loci for psoriasis.

Zuo X(1), Sun L(1), Yin X(1), Gao J(2), Sheng Y(2), Xu J(3), Zhang J(4), He C(5),
Qiu Y(6), Wen G(4), Tian H(7), Zheng X(2), Liu S(2), Wang W(2), Li W(2), Cheng
Y(2), Liu L(2), Chang Y(2), Wang Z(2), Li Z(2), Li L(2), Wu J(2), Fang L(2), Shen
C(2), Zhou F(2), Liang B(2), Chen G(2), Li H(2), Cui Y(8), Xu A(9), Yang X(10),
Hao F(11), Xu L(12), Fan X(2), Li Y(13), Wu R(14), Wang X(15), Liu X(16), Zheng
M(17), Song S(18), Ji B(19), Fang H(20), Yu J(21), Sun Y(22), Hui Y(23), Zhang
F(7), Yang R(24), Yang S(2), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Dermatology and Department of Dermatology, No. 1 Hospital,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, China [2] Department of
Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China [3]
Department of Dermatology, No.2 Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 
230022, China [4] Collaborative Innovation Center of Complex and Severe Skin
Disease, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China [5] State Key Lab
Incubation of Dermatology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Hefei, Anhui
230032, China [6] Key Lab of Dermatology, Ministry of Education, Hefei, Anhui
230032, China [7] Key Lab of Gene Resources Utilization for Severe Inherited
Disorders, Anhui 230032, China. (2)1] Institute of Dermatology and Department of 
Dermatology, No. 1 Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, China
[2] Collaborative Innovation Center of Complex and Severe Skin Disease, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China [3] State Key Lab Incubation of
Dermatology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China [4]
Key Lab of Dermatology, Ministry of Education, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China [5] Key
Lab of Gene Resources Utilization for Severe Inherited Disorders, Anhui 230032,
China. (3)1] Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200040, China [2] Collaborative Innovation Center of Complex and Severe 
Skin Disease, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China. (4)Department
of Dermatology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing 100044, China.
(5)Department of Dermatology, No.1 Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China. (6)Department of Dermatology, Jining No. 1
People's Hospital, Jining, Shandong 272011, China. (7)Shandong Provincial
Institute of Dermatology and Venereology, Jinan, Shandong 250022, China. (8)1]
Collaborative Innovation Center of Complex and Severe Skin Disease, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China [2] State Key Lab Incubation of
Dermatology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China [3]
Key Lab of Dermatology, Ministry of Education, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China [4] Key
Lab of Gene Resources Utilization for Severe Inherited Disorders, Anhui 230032,
China. (9)The Third People's Hospital of Hangzhou, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009,
China. (10)Department of Dermatology, General Hospital of PLA Air Force, Beijing 
100036, China. (11)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military 
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. (12)Department of Dermatology,
Tianjin Changzheng Hospital, Tianjin 300106, China. (13)Department of
Dermatology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150000, China. (14)Department of Dermatology, The Affiliated
Hospital of Inner Mongolia Medical College, Huhehot, Inner Mongolia 010050,
China. (15)Shanghai Skin Diseases and STD Hospital, Shanghai 200050, China.
(16)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, Liaoning 116011, China. (17)Department of Dermatology, The
Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Zhenjiang
310009, China. (18)Department of Dermatology, Dalian Dermatosis Hosptial,
Liaoning 116011, China. (19)Department of Dermatology, Yijishan Hospital of
Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, Anhui 241000, China. (20)Department of Dermatology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Zhenjiang 310006, China. (21)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China. (22)Department 
of Dermatology, Anshan Tanggangzi hosptial, Liaoning 210300, China.
(23)Department of Dermatology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Xinjiang 830054, China. (24)Department of Dermatology, General
Hospital of Beijing Military Command, Beijing 100010, China.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have reproducibly associated ~40
susceptibility loci with psoriasis. However, the missing heritability is evident 
and the contributions of coding variants have not yet been systematically
evaluated. Here, we present a large-scale whole-exome array analysis for
psoriasis consisting of 42,760 individuals. We discover 16 SNPs within 15 new
genes/loci associated with psoriasis, including C1orf141, ZNF683, TMC6, AIM2,
IL1RL1, CASR, SON, ZFYVE16, MTHFR, CCDC129, ZNF143, AP5B1, SYNE2, IFNGR2 and
3q26.2-q27 (P<5.00 × 10(-08)). In addition, we also replicate four known
susceptibility loci TNIP1, NFKBIA, IL12B and LCE3D-LCE3E. These susceptibility
variants identified in the current study collectively account for 1.9% of the
psoriasis heritability. The variant within AIM2 is predicted to impact protein
structure. Our findings increase the number of genetic risk factors for psoriasis
and highlight new and plausible biological pathways in psoriasis.

PMCID: PMC4403312
PMID: 25854761  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nat Commun. 2015 Feb 3;2:6186. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7186.

ZNF143 provides sequence specificity to secure chromatin interactions at gene
promoters.

Bailey SD(1), Zhang X(2), Desai K(2), Aid M(3), Corradin O(4), Cowper-Sal Lari
R(5), Akhtar-Zaidi B(6), Scacheri PC(6), Haibe-Kains B(7), Lupien M(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Princess Margaret Cancer Centre-University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (2)Department of Genetics, Norris
Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, New Hampshire 03755,
USA. (3)Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics Laboratory, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. (5)The Princess Margaret Cancer Centre-University
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7. (6)1] Department of Genetics
and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA 
[2] Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
Ohio 44106, USA. (7)1] The Princess Margaret Cancer Centre-University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [3] Bioinformatics and
Computational Genomics Laboratory, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal
(IRCM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7. (8)1] The Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre-University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7 [2] Department
of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7
[3] Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L7.

Chromatin interactions connect distal regulatory elements to target gene
promoters guiding stimulus- and lineage-specific transcription. Few factors
securing chromatin interactions have so far been identified. Here, by integrating
chromatin interaction maps with the large collection of transcription
factor-binding profiles provided by the ENCODE project, we demonstrate that the
zinc-finger protein ZNF143 preferentially occupies anchors of chromatin
interactions connecting promoters with distal regulatory elements. It binds
directly to promoters and associates with lineage-specific chromatin interactions
and gene expression. Silencing ZNF143 or modulating its DNA-binding affinity
using single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as a surrogate of site-directed
mutagenesis reveals the sequence dependency of chromatin interactions at gene
promoters. We also find that chromatin interactions alone do not regulate gene
expression. Together, our results identify ZNF143 as a novel chromatin-looping
factor that contributes to the architectural foundation of the genome by
providing sequence specificity at promoters connected with distal regulatory
elements.

PMCID: PMC4431651
PMID: 25645053  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cell Rep. 2014 Nov 6;9(3):967-82. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.09.051. Epub 2014
Oct 30.

Host cell factor-1 recruitment to E2F-bound and cell-cycle-control genes is
mediated by THAP11 and ZNF143.

Parker JB(1), Yin H(2), Vinckevicius A(2), Chakravarti D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Science in Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
60611, USA. (2)Division of Reproductive Science in Medicine, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Driskill Graduate Program in Life Sciences, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (3)Division of Reproductive Science in
Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 
60611, USA. Electronic address: debu@northwestern.edu.

Host cell factor-1 (HCF-1) is a metazoan transcriptional coregulator essential
for cell-cycle progression and cell proliferation. Current models suggest a
mechanism whereby HCF-1 functions as a direct coregulator of E2F proteins,
facilitating the expression of genes necessary for cell proliferation. In this
report, we show that HCF-1 recruitment to numerous E2F-bound promoters is
mediated by the concerted action of zinc finger transcription factors THAP11 and 
ZNF143, rather than E2F proteins directly. THAP11, ZNF143, and HCF-1 form a
mutually dependent complex on chromatin, which is independent of E2F occupancy.
Disruption of the THAP11/ZNF143/HCF-1 complex results in altered expression of
cell-cycle control genes and leads to reduced cell proliferation, cell-cycle
progression, and cell viability. These data establish a model in which a
THAP11/ZNF143/HCF-1 complex is a critical component of the transcriptional
regulatory network governing cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4250832
PMID: 25437553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1905-17. doi: 10.1101/gr.176586.114. Epub 2014 Sep
16.

Genome-wide map of regulatory interactions in the human genome.

Heidari N(1), Phanstiel DH(1), He C(2), Grubert F(1), Jahanbani F(1), Kasowski
M(3), Zhang MQ(4), Snyder MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA; (2)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Bioinformatics
Division, Center for Synthetic and System Biology, TNLIST/Department of
Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; (3)Department of
Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305,
USA; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA; (4)MOE Key Laboratory of
Bioinformatics and Bioinformatics Division, Center for Synthetic and System
Biology, TNLIST/Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China; Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Center for Systems Biology, The 
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas 75080-3021, USA. (5)Department
of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, 
USA; mpsnyder@stanford.edu.

Increasing evidence suggests that interactions between regulatory genomic
elements play an important role in regulating gene expression. We generated a
genome-wide interaction map of regulatory elements in human cells (ENCODE tier 1 
cells, K562, GM12878) using Chromatin Interaction Analysis by Paired-End Tag
sequencing (ChIA-PET) experiments targeting six broadly distributed factors.
Bound regions covered 80% of DNase I hypersensitive sites including 99.7% of TSS 
and 98% of enhancers. Correlating this map with ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data sets
revealed cohesin, CTCF, and ZNF143 as key components of three-dimensional
chromatin structure and revealed how the distal chromatin state affects gene
transcription. Comparison of interactions between cell types revealed that
enhancer-promoter interactions were highly cell-type-specific. Construction and
comparison of distal and proximal regulatory networks revealed stark differences 
in structure and biological function. Proximal binding events are enriched at
genes with housekeeping functions, while distal binding events interact with
genes involved in dynamic biological processes including response to stimulus.
This study reveals new mechanistic and functional insights into regulatory region
organization in the nucleus.

© 2014 Heidari et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248309
PMID: 25228660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Sep 4;2:93. doi: 10.1186/s40478-014-0093-y.

Integrated multi-cohort transcriptional meta-analysis of neurodegenerative
diseases.

Li MD, Burns TC, Morgan AA, Khatri P.

INTRODUCTION: Neurodegenerative diseases share common pathologic features
including neuroinflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction and protein aggregation,
suggesting common underlying mechanisms of neurodegeneration. We undertook a
meta-analysis of public gene expression data for neurodegenerative diseases to
identify a common transcriptional signature of neurodegeneration.
RESULTS: Using 1,270 post-mortem central nervous system tissue samples from 13
patient cohorts covering four neurodegenerative diseases, we identified 243
differentially expressed genes, which were similarly dysregulated in 15
additional patient cohorts of 205 samples including seven neurodegenerative
diseases. This gene signature correlated with histologic disease severity.
Metallothioneins featured prominently among differentially expressed genes, and
functional pathway analysis identified specific convergent themes of
dysregulation. MetaCore network analyses revealed various novel candidate hub
genes (e.g. STAU2). Genes associated with M1-polarized macrophages and reactive
astrocytes were strongly enriched in the meta-analysis data. Evaluation of genes 
enriched in neurons revealed 70 down-regulated genes, over half not previously
associated with neurodegeneration. Comparison with aging brain data (3 patient
cohorts, 221 samples) revealed 53 of these to be unique to neurodegenerative
disease, many of which are strong candidates to be important in neuropathogenesis
(e.g. NDN, NAP1L2). ENCODE ChIP-seq analysis predicted common upstream
transcriptional regulators not associated with normal aging (REST, RBBP5, SIN3A, 
SP2, YY1, ZNF143, IKZF1). Finally, we removed genes common to neurodegeneration
from disease-specific gene signatures, revealing uniquely robust immune response 
and JAK-STAT signaling in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results implicate pervasive bioenergetic deficits, M1-type
microglial activation and gliosis as unifying themes of neurodegeneration, and
identify numerous novel genes associated with neurodegenerative processes.

PMCID: PMC4167139
PMID: 25187168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochimie. 2014 Sep;104:137-46. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.06.008. Epub 2014 Jun 
18.

ZNF143 is regulated through alternative 3'UTR isoforms.

Ngondo RP(1), Carbon P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IBMC, 15 
rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France. (2)Architecture et Réactivité de
l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IBMC, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084
Strasbourg, France. Electronic address: p.carbon@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.

ZNF143 is a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor conserved in all
vertebrates, regulating genes involved in primary metabolism and cell growth. It 
is therefore crucial to tightly maintain the adequate level of this factor in the
cell. Although ZNF143 expression is auto-regulated at the transcriptional level, 
nothing is known about the post-transcriptional events influencing its
expression. In this work, performed in mammalian cells, we show that ZNF143
expresses different 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTR) as a result of alternative
polyadenylation. These 3'UTR isoforms have a diverse impact on the ZNF143
transcript fate. Indeed, we show that the longest isoform, unlike the short one, 
contains a destabilizing AU-Rich element and is targeted by the miRNA 590-3p.
Additionally we observed a correlation between ZNF143 downregulation and
miR-590-3p up-regulation in retinoic acid treated teratocarcinoma cells. This
strongly suggests that ZNF143 post-transcriptional regulation depends on the long
3'UTR isoform during teratocarcinoma cells differentiation. Finally we evidenced 
that the alternative polyadenylation site usage is independent of the previously 
identified ZNF143 transcriptional auto-regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24952353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 13;15:472. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-472.

Improving analysis of transcription factor binding sites within ChIP-Seq data
based on topological motif enrichment.

Worsley Hunt R, Mathelier A, Del Peso L, Wasserman WW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and Family Research
Institute, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada. wyeth@cmmt.ubc.ca.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled to high-throughput
sequencing (ChIP-Seq) techniques can reveal DNA regions bound by transcription
factors (TF). Analysis of the ChIP-Seq regions is now a central component in gene
regulation studies. The need remains strong for methods to improve the
interpretation of ChIP-Seq data and the study of specific TF binding sites
(TFBS).
RESULTS: We introduce a set of methods to improve the interpretation of ChIP-Seq 
data, including the inference of mediating TFs based on TFBS motif
over-representation analysis and the subsequent study of spatial distribution of 
TFBSs. TFBS over-representation analysis applied to ChIP-Seq data is used to
detect which TFBSs arise more frequently than expected by chance. Visualization
of over-representation analysis results with new composition-bias plots reveals
systematic bias in over-representation scores. We introduce the BiasAway
background generating software to resolve the problem. A heuristic procedure
based on topological motif enrichment relative to the ChIP-Seq peaks' local
maximums highlights peaks likely to be directly bound by a TF of interest. The
results suggest that on average two-thirds of a ChIP-Seq dataset's peaks are
bound by the ChIP'd TF; the origin of the remaining peaks remaining undetermined.
Additional visualization methods allow for the study of both inter-TFBS spatial
relationships and motif-flanking sequence properties, as demonstrated in case
studies for TBP and ZNF143/THAP11.
CONCLUSIONS: Topological properties of TFBS within ChIP-Seq datasets can be
harnessed to better interpret regulatory sequences. Using GC content corrected
TFBS over-representation analysis, combined with visualization techniques and
analysis of the topological distribution of TFBS, we can distinguish peaks likely
to be directly bound by a TF. The new methods will empower researchers for
exploration of gene regulation and TF binding.

PMCID: PMC4082612
PMID: 24927817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1839(7):579-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.05.007.
Epub 2014 May 19.

The transcriptional repression activity of STAF65<U+03B3> is facilitated by promoter
tethering and nuclear import of class IIa histone deacetylases.

Hsieh FS(1), Chen NT(1), Yao YL(2), Wang SY(1), Chen JJ(1), Lai CC(1), Yang
WM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung
40227, Taiwan. (2)Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung 41354,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung 40227, Taiwan; Rong Hsing Research Center for Translational Medicine,
National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 40227, Taiwan. Electronic address:
yangwm@nchu.edu.tw.

Aberrant expression levels of transcriptional regulators result in alterations in
transcriptional control. STAF65<U+03B3> is a structural subunit of the GCN5
transcriptional co-activator complex. Reports showed that STAF65<U+03B3> is highly
expressed in several human cancer cells, but the consequences of this aberrant
expression pattern remain elusive. Here, we show that the STAF65<U+03B3> protein is
highly expressed in lung adenocarcinoma patients and high levels of STAF65<U+03B3>
correlate with poor prognosis. High levels of STAF65<U+03B3> cause repression of the
c-Myc oncogene through physical association with transcription factor YY1 and
co-repressors HDACs. Physical interactions between STAF65<U+03B3> and class IIa HDACs
facilitate nuclear enrichment and regulate the assembly of HDAC complexes.
Moreover, SUMOylation of STAF65<U+03B3> is necessary for maintaining the co-repressor
complex containing YY1 and class IIa HDACs at the promoter. Our findings reveal a
distinct role of STAF65<U+03B3> in nuclear import, transcriptional repression, and cell 
cycle regulation at high levels of expression, which is associated with poor
clinical outcomes of lung adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24852358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Br J Cancer. 2014 May 13;110(10):2583-92. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.202. Epub 2014
Apr 15.

The combination of strong expression of ZNF143 and high MIB-1 labelling index
independently predicts shorter disease-specific survival in lung adenocarcinoma.

Kawatsu Y(1), Kitada S(2), Uramoto H(3), Zhi L(4), Takeda T(1), Kimura T(1),
Horie S(1), Tanaka F(3), Sasaguri Y(5), Izumi H(6), Kohno K(7), Yamada S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Management, Institute of Industrial Ecological
Sciences, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu
807-8555, Japan. (2)1] Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, School of
Medicine, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu
807-8555, Japan [2] Department of Urology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan. (3)Department 
of Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Occupational
and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan. (4)1] Department of
Pathology and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan [2] Department of Medical
Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang 110001,
People's Republic of China. (5)1] Department of Pathology and Cell Biology,
School of Medicine, University of Occupational and Environmental Health,
Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan [2] Laboratory of Pathology, Fukuoka Wajiro Hospital, 
Fukuoka 811-0213, Japan. (6)Department of Occupational Pneumology, School of
Medicine, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu
807-8555, Japan. (7)The President Laboratory, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan. (8)Department 
of Pathology and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor, zinc finger protein 143 (ZNF143),
positively regulates many cell-cycle-related genes. The ZNF143 would show high
expression of multiple solid tumours related closely to cancer cell growth,
similar to the widely accepted Ki67 (MIB-1) protein, but the underlying
mechanisms for ZNF143 remain unclear. We investigated the association of ZNF143
expression with clinicopathological features and prognoses of patients with lung 
adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Expressions of ZNF143 and MIB-1 were immunohistochemically analysed in
183 paraffin-embedded tumour samples of patients with lung adenocarcinoma. The
ZNF143 expression was considered to be strong when >30% of the cancer cells
demonstrated positive staining.
RESULTS: Strong ZNF143+ expression showed a significantly close relationship to
pathologically moderate to poor differentiation and highly invasive
characteristics. The ZNF143 positivity potentially induced cell growth of lung
adenocarcinoma, correlated significantly with high MIB-1 labelling index (<U+2A7E>10%). 
Univariate and multivariate analyses demonstrated that both strong ZNF143+ and
the high MIB-1 index group have only and significantly worse survival rates.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of strong ZNF143 expression and high MIB-1 index
potentially predicts high proliferating activity and poor prognosis in patients
with lung adenocarcinoma, and may offer a therapeutic target against ZNF143.

PMCID: PMC4021533
PMID: 24736586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(4):2171-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1136. Epub 2013
Nov 14.

Transcription factor abundance controlled by an auto-regulatory mechanism
involving a transcription start site switch.

Ngondo RP(1), Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IBMC, 15 
Rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.

A transcriptional feedback loop is the simplest and most direct means for a
transcription factor to provide an increased stability of gene expression. In
this work performed in human cells, we reveal a new negative auto-regulatory
mechanism involving an alternative transcription start site (TSS) usage. Using
the activating transcription factor ZNF143 as a model, we show that the ZNF143
low-affinity binding sites, located downstream of its canonical TSS, play the
role of protein sensors to induce the up- or down-regulation of ZNF143 gene
expression. We uncovered that the TSS switch that mediates this regulation
implies the differential expression of two transcripts with an opposite protein
production ability due to their different 5' untranslated regions. Moreover, our 
analysis of the ENCODE data suggests that this mechanism could be used by other
transcription factors to rapidly respond to their own aberrant expression level.

PMCID: PMC3936768
PMID: 24234445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 12;110(46):18537-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317608110. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen leader protein localizes to promoters and
enhancers with cell transcription factors and EBNA2.

Portal D(1), Zhou H, Zhao B, Kharchenko PV, Lowry E, Wong L, Quackenbush J,
Holloway D, Jiang S, Lu Y, Kieff E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Department of
Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigens EBNALP (LP) and EBNA2 (E2) are
coexpressed in EBV-infected B lymphocytes and are critical for lymphoblastoid
cell line outgrowth. LP removes NCOR and RBPJ repressive complexes from
promoters, enhancers, and matrix-associated deacetylase bodies, whereas E2
activates transcription from distal enhancers. LP ChIP-seq analyses identified
19,224 LP sites of which ~50% were ± 2 kb of a transcriptional start site. LP
sites were enriched for B-cell transcription factors (TFs), YY1, SP1, PAX5, BATF,
IRF4, ETS1, RAD21, PU.1, CTCF, RBPJ, ZNF143, SMC3, NF<U+03BA>B, TBLR, and EBF. E2 sites 
were also highly enriched for LP-associated cell TFs and were more highly
occupied by RBPJ and EBF. LP sites were highly marked by H3K4me3, H3K27ac, H2Az, 
H3K9ac, RNAPII, and P300, indicative of activated transcription. LP sites were
29% colocalized with E2 (LP/E2). LP/E2 sites were more similar to LP than to E2
sites in associated cell TFs, RNAPII, P300, and histone H3K4me3, H3K9ac, H3K27ac,
and H2Az occupancy, and were more highly transcribed than LP or E2 sites. Gene
affected by CTCF and LP cooccupancy were more highly expressed than genes
affected by CTCF alone. LP was at myc enhancers and promoters and of MYC
regulated ccnd2, 23 med complex components, and MYC regulated cell survival
genes, igf2r and bcl2. These data implicate LP and associated TFs and DNA looping
factors CTCF, RAD21, SMC3, and YY1/INO80 chromatin-remodeling complexes in
repressor depletion and gene activation necessary for lymphoblastoid cell line
growth and survival.

PMCID: PMC3832032
PMID: 24167291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Feb;53 Suppl 1:E161-8. doi: 10.1002/mc.22083. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

A role of zinc-finger protein 143 for cancer cell migration and invasion through 
ZEB1 and E-cadherin in colon cancer cells.

Paek AR(1), Lee CH, You HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology Branch, Division of Cancer Biology, National
Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi, South Korea.

To investigate the role of zinc-finger protein 143 in cancer cells, we stably
introduced ZNF143 expression knockdown by infecting colon cancer cells with short
hairpin (sh) RNA-lentiviral particles against ZNF143 (HCT116 sh-ZNF143). Compared
to sh-control cells, HCT116 sh-ZNF143 cells showed faster wound healing,
increased migration through Transwell chambers, and increased invasion through
Matrigel in Transwell chambers. ZNF143 knockdown increased transcriptional
expression of ZEB1. Additionally, ZNF143 regulated E-cadherin transcriptional
expression. Small interfering-RNA-mediated silencing of ZEB1 expression affected 
motility in HCT116 sh-ZNF143 cells. These data suggest that ZNF143 is involved in
cellular motility through a ZEB1-E-cadherin-linked pathway in colon cancer cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24009065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Genomics. 2013 May 25;14:349. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-349.

NEXT-peak: a normal-exponential two-peak model for peak-calling in ChIP-seq data.

Kim NK(1), Jayatillake RV, Spouge JL.

Author information: 
(1)Mathematics and Statistics Department, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA
23529, USA. nxkim@odu.edu

BACKGROUND: Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing 
(ChIP-seq) can locate transcription factor binding sites on genomic scale.
Although many models and programs are available to call peaks, none has dominated
its competition in comparison studies.
RESULTS: We propose a rigorous statistical model, the normal-exponential two-peak
(NEXT-peak) model, which parallels the physical processes generating the
empirical data, and which can naturally incorporate mappability information. The 
model therefore estimates total strength of binding (even if some binding
locations do not map uniquely into a reference genome, effectively censoring
them); it also assigns an error to an estimated binding location. The comparison 
study with existing programs on real ChIP-seq datasets (STAT1, NRSF, and ZNF143) 
demonstrates that the NEXT-peak model performs well both in calling peaks and
locating them. The model also provides a goodness-of-fit test, to screen out
spurious peaks and to infer multiple binding events in a region.
CONCLUSIONS: The NEXT-peak program calls peaks on any test dataset about as
accurately as any other, but provides unusual accuracy in the estimated location 
of the peaks it calls. NEXT-peak is based on rigorous statistics, so its model
also provides a principled foundation for a more elaborate statistical analysis
of ChIP-seq data.

PMCID: PMC3672025
PMID: 23706083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genome Res. 2013 Jun;23(6):907-16. doi: 10.1101/gr.150078.112. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

HCFC1 is a common component of active human CpG-island promoters and coincides
with ZNF143, THAP11, YY1, and GABP transcription factor occupancy.

Michaud J(1), Praz V, James Faresse N, Jnbaptiste CK, Tyagi S, Schütz F, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Génopode, 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.

In human transcriptional regulation, DNA-sequence-specific factors can associate 
with intermediaries that orchestrate interactions with a diverse set of
chromatin-modifying enzymes. One such intermediary is HCFC1 (also known as
HCF-1). HCFC1, first identified in herpes simplex virus transcription, has a
poorly defined role in cellular transcriptional regulation. We show here that, in
HeLa cells, HCFC1 is observed bound to 5400 generally active CpG-island
promoters. Examination of the DNA sequences underlying the HCFC1-binding sites
revealed three sequence motifs associated with the binding of (1) ZNF143 and
THAP11 (also known as Ronin), (2) GABP, and (3) YY1 sequence-specific
transcription factors. Subsequent analysis revealed colocalization of HCFC1 with 
these four transcription factors at ~90% of the 5400 HCFC1-bound promoters. These
studies suggest that a relatively small number of transcription factors play a
major role in HeLa-cell transcriptional regulation in association with HCFC1.

PMCID: PMC3668359
PMID: 23539139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Apr;41(7):4000-14. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt088. Epub 2013 Feb
13.

Modulation of gene expression via overlapping binding sites exerted by ZNF143,
Notch1 and THAP11.

Ngondo-Mbongo RP(1), Myslinski E, Aster JC, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IBMC, 15 
rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.

ZNF143 is a zinc-finger protein involved in the transcriptional regulation of
both coding and non-coding genes from polymerase II and III promoters. Our study 
deciphers the genome-wide regulatory role of ZNF143 in relation with the two
previously unrelated transcription factors Notch1/ICN1 and thanatos-associated
protein 11 (THAP11) in several human and murine cells. We show that two distinct 
motifs, SBS1 and SBS2, are associated to ZNF143-binding events in promoters of
>3000 genes. Without co-occupation, these sites are also bound by Notch1/ICN1 in 
T-lymphoblastic leukaemia cells as well as by THAP11, a factor involved in
self-renewal of embryonic stem cells. We present evidence that ICN1 binding
overlaps with ZNF143 binding events at the SBS1 and SBS2 motifs, whereas the
overlap occurs only at SBS2 for THAP11. We demonstrate that the three factors
modulate expression of common target genes through the mutually exclusive
occupation of overlapping binding sites. The model we propose predicts that the
binding competition between the three factors controls biological processes such 
as rapid cell growth of both neoplastic and stem cells. Overall, our study
establishes a novel relationship between ZNF143, THAP11 and ICN1 and reveals
important insights into ZNF143-mediated gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3627581
PMID: 23408857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(11):e1003028. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003028. Epub 2012 Nov
15.

Genomic study of RNA polymerase II and III SNAPc-bound promoters reveals a gene
transcribed by both enzymes and a broad use of common activators.

James Faresse N(1), Canella D, Praz V, Michaud J, Romascano D, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

SNAP(c) is one of a few basal transcription factors used by both RNA polymerase
(pol) II and pol III. To define the set of active SNAP(c)-dependent promoters in 
human cells, we have localized genome-wide four SNAP(c) subunits, GTF2B (TFIIB), 
BRF2, pol II, and pol III. Among some seventy loci occupied by SNAP(c) and other 
factors, including pol II snRNA genes, pol III genes with type 3 promoters, and a
few un-annotated loci, most are primarily occupied by either pol II and GTF2B, or
pol III and BRF2. A notable exception is the RPPH1 gene, which is occupied by
significant amounts of both polymerases. We show that the large majority of
SNAP(c)-dependent promoters recruit POU2F1 and/or ZNF143 on their enhancer
region, and a subset also recruits GABP, a factor newly implicated in
SNAP(c)-dependent transcription. These activators associate with pol II and III
promoters in G1 slightly before the polymerase, and ZNF143 is required for
efficient transcription initiation complex assembly. The results characterize a
set of genes with unique properties and establish that polymerase specificity is 
not absolute in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3499247
PMID: 23166507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Nov 15;3:e422. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.156.

ZNF143 transcription factor mediates cell survival through upregulation of the
GPX1 activity in the mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction.

Lu W(1), Chen Z, Zhang H, Wang Y, Luo Y, Huang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. wqlu@mdanderson.org

Mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction has intimate relationship with redox
regulation. The key mechanism about how the mitochondrial respiration-defective
cells survive oxidative stress is still elusive. Here, we report that
transcription factor zinc-finger protein 143 (ZNF143) expression and glutathione 
peroxidase (GPX) activity are markedly increased in the mitochondrial
respiratory-defective cells induced by dominant-negative DNA polymerase <U+03B3>
(POLGdn). In this work, investigation of the cellular antioxidant glutathione
(GSH) and enzyme GPX activity in the mitochondrial dysfunction revealed the
presence of an increased synthesis of GSH through the activation of GCLC
(glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit) and GCLM (glutamate-cysteine ligase
regulatory subunit) gene expression, and also a positive upregulation of
glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) activity by the transcription factor ZNF143.
Significant increase in gene expression of SepSecS, the key enzyme responsible
for selenocysteine transfer RNA (tRNA) synthesis, further confirmed the
activation of the selenocysteine synthesis pathway. By using both GPX1 and ZNF143
knockdown, we provided insight into the involvement of ZNF143 in promoting GPX1
activity and protecting cells from oxidative damage and cisplatin treatment in
the mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, we reported the possible regulation
of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) in the mitochondrial dysfunction. 
Our findings delineate an important antioxidant survival pathway that allows the 
mitochondrial-defective cells to survive oxidative stress and cisplatin
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3542592
PMID: 23152058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Mol Biol. 2012 Jan 23;13:3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-13-3.

The transcriptional activator ZNF143 is essential for normal development in
zebrafish.

Halbig KM(1), Lekven AC, Kunkel GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

BACKGROUND: ZNF143 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that stimulates
transcription of both small RNA genes by RNA polymerase II or III, or
protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II, using separable activating domains. We
describe phenotypic effects following knockdown of this protein in developing
Danio rerio (zebrafish) embryos by injection of morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides that target znf143 mRNA.
RESULTS: The loss of function phenotype is pleiotropic and includes a broad array
of abnormalities including defects in heart, blood, ear and midbrain hindbrain
boundary. Defects are rescued by coinjection of synthetic mRNA encoding
full-length ZNF143 protein, but not by protein lacking the amino-terminal
activation domains. Accordingly, expression of several marker genes is affected
following knockdown, including GATA-binding protein 1 (gata1), cardiac myosin
light chain 2 (cmlc2) and paired box gene 2a (pax2a). The zebrafish pax2a gene
proximal promoter contains two binding sites for ZNF143, and reporter gene
transcription driven by this promoter in transfected cells is activated by this
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Normal development of zebrafish embryos requires ZNF143.
Furthermore, the pax2a gene is probably one example of many protein-coding gene
targets of ZNF143 during zebrafish development.

PMCID: PMC3282657
PMID: 22268977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cells. 2011 Nov;32(5):415-9. doi: 10.1007/s10059-011-0078-7. Epub 2011 Sep 5.

GAIP-interacting protein, C-terminus is involved in the induction of zinc-finger 
protein 143 in response to insulin-like growth factor-1 in colon cancer cells.

Paek AR(1), You HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Branch, Division of Cancer Biology, Research Institute National
Cancer Center, Goyang 410-769, Korea.

Previously, we reported that the expression of zinc-finger protein 143 (ZNF143)
was induced by insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) via reactive oxygen species
(ROS)- and phosphatidylinositide-3-kinase (PI3-kinase)-linked pathways in colon
cancer cells. Here, we investigated whether GAIP-interacting protein, C-terminus 
(GIPC), a binding partner of IGF-1R, is involved in ZNF143 expression through
IGF-1 and IGF-1R signaling in colon cancer cells. The knockdown of GIPC in colon 
cancer cells reduced ZNF143 expression in response to IGF-1. IGF-1 signaling
through its receptor, leading to the phosphorylation and activation of the
PI3-kinase-Akt pathway and mitogenactivated protein kinases (MAPKs) was
unaffected by the knockdown of GIPC, indicating the independence of the
GIPC-linked pathway from PI3-kinase- and MAPK-linked signaling in IGF-1-induced
ZNF143 expression. In accordance with previous results in breast cancer cells
(Choi et al., 2010), the knockdown of GIPC reduced ROS production in response to 
IGF-1 in colon cancer cells. Furthermore, the knockdown of GIPC reduced the
expression of Rad51, which is regulated by ZNF143, in response to IGF-1 in colon 
cancer cells. Taken together, these data suggest that GIPC is involved in IGF-1
signaling leading to ZNF143 expression through the regulation of ROS production, 
which may play a role for colon cancer tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3887697
PMID: 21909943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 6;108(36):14908-13. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109023108. Epub 2011 Jul 7.

Genome-wide analysis reveals conserved and divergent features of Notch1/RBPJ
binding in human and murine T-lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Wang H(1), Zou J, Zhao B, Johannsen E, Ashworth T, Wong H, Pear WS, Schug J,
Blacklow SC, Arnett KL, Bernstein BE, Kieff E, Aster JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 6;108(36):14715-6.

Notch1 regulates gene expression by associating with the DNA-binding factor RBPJ 
and is oncogenic in murine and human T-cell progenitors. Using ChIP-Seq, we find 
that in human and murine T-lymphoblastic leukemia (TLL) genomes Notch1 binds
preferentially to promoters, to RBPJ binding sites, and near imputed ZNF143, ETS,
and RUNX sites. ChIP-Seq confirmed that ZNF143 binds to ~40% of Notch1 sites.
Notch1/ZNF143 sites are characterized by high Notch1 and ZNF143 signals, frequent
cobinding of RBPJ (generally through sites embedded within ZNF143 motifs), strong
promoter bias, and relatively low mean levels of activating chromatin marks. RBPJ
and ZNF143 binding to DNA is mutually exclusive in vitro, suggesting RBPJ/Notch1 
and ZNF143 complexes exchange on these sites in cells. K-means clustering of
Notch1 binding sites and associated motifs identified conserved Notch1-RUNX,
Notch1-ETS, Notch1-RBPJ, Notch1-ZNF143, and Notch1-ZNF143-ETS clusters with
different genomic distributions and levels of chromatin marks. Although Notch1
binds mainly to gene promoters, ~75% of direct target genes lack promoter binding
and are presumably regulated by enhancers, which were identified near MYC, DTX1, 
IGF1R, IL7R, and the GIMAP cluster. Human and murine TLL genomes also have many
sites that bind only RBPJ. Murine RBPJ-only sites are highly enriched for imputed
REST (a DNA-binding transcriptional repressor) sites, whereas human RPBJ-only
sites lack REST motifs and are more highly enriched for imputed CREB sites. Thus,
there is a conserved network of cis-regulatory factors that interacts with Notch1
to regulate gene expression in TLL cells, as well as unique classes of divergent 
RBPJ-only sites that also likely regulate transcription.

PMCID: PMC3169118
PMID: 21737748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biochem J. 2011 May 15;436(1):133-43. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101798.

Adhesion-dependent Skp2 transcription requires selenocysteine tRNA gene
transcription-activating factor (STAF).

Hernández-Negrete I(1), Sala-Newby GB, Perl A, Kunkel GR, Newby AC, Bond M.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, University of Bristol, Bristol Royal Infirmary,
Bristol BS2 8HW, UK.

Cell adhesion is essential for cell cycle progression in most normal cells. Loss 
of adhesion dependence is a hallmark of cellular transformation. The F-box
protein Skp2 (S-phase kinase-associated protein 2) controls G(1)-S-phase
progression and is subject to adhesion-dependent transcriptional regulation,
although the mechanisms are poorly understood. We identify two cross-species
conserved binding elements for the STAF (selenocysteine tRNA gene
transcription-activating factor) in the Skp2 promoter that are essential for Skp2
promoter activity. Endogenous STAF specifically binds these elements in EMSA
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assay) and ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation)
analysis. STAF is sufficient and necessary for Skp2 promoter activity since
exogenous STAF activates promoter activity and expression and STAF siRNA (small
interfering RNA) inhibits Skp2 promoter activity, mRNA and protein expression and
cell proliferation. Furthermore, ectopic Skp2 expression completely reverses the 
inhibitory effects of STAF silencing on proliferation. Importantly, STAF
expression and binding to the Skp2 promoter is adhesion-dependent and associated 
with adhesion-dependent Skp2 expression in non-transformed cells. Ectopic STAF
rescues Skp2 expression in suspension cells. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that STAF is essential and sufficient for Skp2 promoter activity and 
plays a role in the adhesion-dependent expression of Skp2 and ultimately cell
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3105252
PMID: 21352097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancers (Basel). 2011 Oct 19;3(4):3909-20. doi: 10.3390/cancers3043909.

Forced Expression of ZNF143 Restrains Cancer Cell Growth.

Izumi H(1), Yasuniwa Y, Akiyama M, Yamaguchi T, Kuma A, Kitamura N, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 
807-8555, Japan. h-izumi@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp.

We previously reported that the transcription factor Zinc Finger Protein 143
(ZNF143) regulates the expression of genes associated with cell cycle and cell
division, and that downregulation of ZNF143 induces cell cycle arrest at G2/M. To
assess the function of ZNF143 expression in the cell cycle, we established two
cells with forced expression of ZNF143 derived from PC3 prostate cancer cell
lines. These cell lines overexpress genes associated with cell cycle and cell
division, such as polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), aurora kinase B (AURKB) and some
minichromosome maintenance complex components (MCM). However, the doubling time
of cells with forced expression of ZNF143 was approximately twice as long as its 
control counterpart cell line. Analysis following serum starvation and re-seeding
showed that PC3 cells were synchronized at G1 in the cell cycle. Also, ZNF143
expression fluctuated, and was at its lowest level in G2/M. However, PC3 cells
with forced expression of ZNF143 synchronized at G2/M, and showed lack of cell
cycle-dependent fluctuation of nuclear expression of MCM proteins. Furthermore,
G2/M population of both cisplatin-resistant PCDP6 cells over-expressing ZNF143
(derived from PC3 cells) and cells with forced expression of ZNF143 was
significantly higher than that of each counterpart, and the doubling time of
PCDP6 cells is about 2.5 times longer than that of PC3 cells. These data
suggested that fluctuations in ZNF143 expression are required both for gene
expression associated with cell cycle and for cell division.

PMCID: PMC3763402
PMID: 24213117  [PubMed]


26. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Apr;39(8):3116-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1301. Epub 2010
Dec 21.

Genome-wide evidence for an essential role of the human Staf/ZNF143 transcription
factor in bidirectional transcription.

Anno YN(1), Myslinski E, Ngondo-Mbongo RP, Krol A, Poch O, Lecompte O, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology and Genomics, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, The Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, UMR7104, F-67400 Illkirch, France.

In the human genome, ~ 10% of the genes are arranged head to head so that their
transcription start sites reside within <1 kbp on opposite strands. In this
configuration, a bidirectional promoter generally drives expression of the two
genes. How bidirectional expression is performed from these particular promoters 
constitutes a puzzling question. Here, by a combination of in silico and
biochemical approaches, we demonstrate that hStaf/ZNF143 is involved in
controlling expression from a subset of divergent gene pairs. The binding sites
for hStaf/ZNF143 (SBS) are overrepresented in bidirectional versus unidirectional
promoters. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays with a significant set of
bidirectional promoters containing putative SBS revealed that 93% of them are
associated with hStaf/ZNF143. Expression of dual reporter genes directed by
bidirectional promoters are dependent on the SBS integrity and requires
hStaf/ZNF143. Furthermore, in some cases, functional SBS are located in
bidirectional promoters of gene pairs encoding a noncoding RNA and a protein
gene. Remarkably, hStaf/ZNF143 per se exhibits an inherently bidirectional
transcription activity, and together our data provide the demonstration that
hStaf/ZNF143 is indeed a transcription factor controlling the expression of
divergent protein-protein and protein-non-coding RNA gene pairs.

PMCID: PMC3082894
PMID: 21177654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Sci. 2010 Dec;101(12):2538-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01725.x. Epub
2010 Sep 23.

Role of ZNF143 in tumor growth through transcriptional regulation of DNA
replication and cell-cycle-associated genes.

Izumi H(1), Wakasugi T, Shimajiri S, Tanimoto A, Sasaguri Y, Kashiwagi E,
Yasuniwa Y, Akiyama M, Han B, Wu Y, Uchiumi T, Arao T, Nishio K, Yamazaki R,
Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology Otorhinolaryngology Pathology and Cell
Biology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and Environmental Health,
Kitakyushu, Japan.

The cell cycle is strictly regulated by numerous mechanisms to ensure cell
division. The transcriptional regulation of cell-cycle-related genes is poorly
understood, with the exception of the E2F family that governs the cell cycle.
Here, we show that a transcription factor, zinc finger protein 143 (ZNF143),
positively regulates many cell-cycle-associated genes and is highly expressed in 
multiple solid tumors. RNA-interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of ZNF143
showed that expression of 152 genes was downregulated in human prostate cancer
PC3 cells. Among these ZNF143 targets, 41 genes (27%) were associated with cell
cycle and DNA replication including cell division cycle 6 homolog (CDC6),
polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) and minichromosome maintenance complex component (MCM) 
DNA replication proteins. Furthermore, RNAi of ZNF143 induced apoptosis following
G2/M cell cycle arrest. Cell growth of 10 lung cancer cell lines was
significantly correlated with cellular expression of ZNF143. Our data suggest
that ZNF143 might be a master regulator of the cell cycle. Our findings also
indicate that ZNF143 is a member of the growing list of non-oncogenes that are
promising cancer drug targets.

© 2010 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 20860770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Oct 31;42(10):696-702.

IGF-1 induces expression of zinc-finger protein 143 in colon cancer cells through
phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase and reactive oxygen species.

Paek AR(1), Kim SH, Kim SS, Kim KT, You HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Branch, Division of Cancer Biology, Research Institute National
Cancer Center, Goyang 410-769, Korea.

Expression of zinc-finger protein 143 (ZNF143), a human homolog of the Xenopus
transcriptional activator protein Staf, is induced by various DNA-damaging agents
including etoposide, doxorubicin, and gamma-irradiation. ZNF143 binds to
cisplatin-modified DNA, and its levels are increased in cancer cells that are
resistant to anticancer drugs, including cisplatin, suggesting that it plays a
role in carcinogenesis and cancer cell survival. However, the mechanism of ZNF143
induction in cancer cells remains unclear. Both insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) and its receptor (IGF-1R) have been reported to be overexpressed in
cancer cells and to be related to anticancer drug resistance, but the identity of
the relevant signaling mediators is still being investigated. In the present
study, we observed that IGF-1 was able to induce ZNF143 expression in HCT116
human colon cancer cells and that wortmannin, an inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositide 3- kinase (PI3-kinase), inhibited this induction, as did
diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), an NADPH oxidase inhibitor, and monodansylcardavarine 
(MDC), a receptor internalization inhibitor. Treatment with MDC decreased the
IGF-1-stimulated generation of reactive oxygen species. Taken together, these
data suggest that IGF-1 induces ZNF143 expression in cancer cells via PI3-kinase 
and reactive oxygen species generation during receptor internalization.

PMCID: PMC2966743
PMID: 20733350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 26;393(1):111-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.094. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

Transcriptional regulation of the human establishment of cohesion 1 homolog 2
gene.

Nishihara M(1), Yamada M, Nozaki M, Nakahira K, Yanagihara I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Medicine, Osaka Medical Center and Research
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Osaka 594-1101, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation of human establishment of cohesion 1 homolog 2
(ESCO2), the causative gene of Roberts syndrome, was investigated. Deletion and
mutation analyses of the ESCO2 promoter indicated that the selenocysteine
tRNA-activating factor (Staf) binding site (SBS) is an essential element for
transcriptional activation of ESCO2. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that the zinc finger
protein 143 (ZNF143), a human homolog of Xenopus Staf, bound to the ESCO2
promoter. The ACTACAN submotif, adjacent to SBS, also contributed to
transcriptional activation of ESCO2. EMSA indicated that the ACTACAN submotif was
not involved in binding of ZNF143 to SBS. S phase-specific expression of the
ESCO2 gene was confirmed by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), but EMSA revealed binding of ZNF143 to SBS in G1/S and G2/M
phases. These results demonstrated that SBS functioned as the basal
transcriptional activator of the S phase-specific gene ESCO2, but other
mechanisms are required for cell cycle-dependent expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20116366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Rinsho Byori. 2009 Oct;57(10):978-86.

[Cisplatin sensitivity transcriptional factor and mitochondrial DNA maintenance
protein].

[Article in Japanese]

Uchiumi T(1), Knag D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Graduated School of 
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
uchiumi@cclm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Cisplatin is one of the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agents, with
demonstrated activity against a diverse spectrum of malignancies, including
testicular cancer, ovarian carcinoma, and head/neck tumors. However, the
therapeutic efficacy of the drug is limited by the severity of its side effects
and the potential progression of tumor cells to a cisplatin-resistant state. We
found that the transcription factors of genes involved in cisplatin resistance
are often overexpressed or activated in cisplatin-resistant cells. In this paper,
we describe ATF4, Clock, ZNF143, and YB-1 as cisplatin resistance genes. Clock
and the ATF4 transcription system might play an important role in multidrug
resistance through the glutathione-dependent redox system, and the physiological 
potential of the Clock-controlled redox system might be important to better
understand oxidative stress-associated disorders including cancer and systemic
chronotherapy. We also describe the basis for understanding the effects of
cisplatin on mitochondrial activity and the mechanisms of cellular toxicity and
resistance caused by this drug.

PMID: 19928495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(2):370-81. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp988. Epub 2009 Nov 
11.

The scaRNA2 is produced by an independent transcription unit and its processing
is directed by the encoding region.

Gérard MA(1), Myslinski E, Chylak N, Baudrey S, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IBMC, 15 
rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.

The C/D box scaRNA2 is predicted to guide specific 2'-O-methylation of U2 snRNA. 
In contrast to other SCARNA genes, SCARNA2 appears to be independently
transcribed. By transient expression of SCARNA2-reporter gene constructs, we have
demonstrated that this gene is transcribed by RNA polymerase II and that the
promoter elements responsible for its transcription are contained within a 161 bp
region upstream of the transcription start site. In mammals, we have identified
four cross species conserved promoter elements, a TATA motif, an hStaf/ZNF143
binding site and two novel elements that are required for full promoter activity.
Binding of the human hStaf/ZNF143 transcription factor to its target sequence is 
required for promoter activity, suggesting that hStaf/ZNF143 is a fundamental
regulator of the SCARNA2 gene. We also showed that RNA polymerase II continues
transcription past the 3'-end of the mature RNA, irrespective of the identity of 
the Pol II promoter. The 3'-end processing and accumulation are governed by the
sole information contained in the scaRNA2 encoding region, the maturation
occurring via a particular pathway incompatible with that of mRNA or snRNA
production.

PMCID: PMC2811027
PMID: 19906720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Gene. 2008 Sep 15;421(1-2):89-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.06.019. Epub 2008 Jun 
21.

Zebrafish U6 small nuclear RNA gene promoters contain a SPH element in an unusual
location.

Halbig KM(1), Lekven AC, Kunkel GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

Promoters for vertebrate small nuclear RNA (snRNA) genes contain a relatively
simple array of transcriptional control elements, divided into proximal and
distal regions. Most of these genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (e.g.,
U1, U2), whereas the U6 gene is transcribed by RNA polymerase III. Previously
identified vertebrate U6 snRNA gene promoters consist of a proximal sequence
element (PSE) and TATA element in the proximal region, plus a distal region with 
octamer (OCT) and SphI postoctamer homology (SPH) elements. We have found that
zebrafish U6 snRNA promoters contain the SPH element in a novel proximal position
immediately upstream of the TATA element. The zebrafish SPH element is recognized
by SPH-binding factor/selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating
factor/zinc finger protein 143 (SBF/Staf/ZNF143) in vitro. Furthermore, a
zebrafish U6 promoter with a defective SPH element is inefficiently transcribed
when injected into embryos.

PMID: 18619527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Gene. 2008 Jan 31;408(1-2):72-84. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Deciphering the cis-regulatory elements of co-expressed genes in PCOS by in
silico analysis.

Sarkar C(1), Maitra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health (ICMR), Mumbai-400012, Parel, India.

Erratum in
    Gene. 2009 Feb 15;431(1-2):95.

In recent times, the focus of research in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) has
shifted from candidate gene(s) approach to whole genome analysis for deciphering 
its molecular pathophysiology. In this regard, several microarray studies have
been published, showing differential expression of genes between normal and PCOS 
states. Co-expression of genes as obtained in microarray experiments can also
imply co-regulation at the transcriptional level by various transcription
factors. In order to identify such transcription factors, the in silico
elucidation of Transcription Factor Binding Sites (TFBS) is emerging as an
important tool. With this hypothesis, we looked for TFBS over-representation in a
PCOS microarray gene set (n=130) using in silico tools. We extracted 1000 bps
upstream and 200 bps downstream regions from all these genes and identified 4
different TFBS, which were over-represented as compared to a human promoter
background model. These four transcription factors are Staf, E47, CCAAT and
CRE-BP1/c-jun. The role of these transcription factors and their compatible
members in PCOS pathophysiology is described in details in the text. The factors 
might provide a novel insight into the pathophysiology of PCOS.

PMID: 18055135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):108-21. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

STAGA recruits Mediator to the MYC oncoprotein to stimulate transcription and
cell proliferation.

Liu X(1), Vorontchikhina M, Wang YL, Faiola F, Martinez E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA
92521, USA.

Activation of eukaryotic gene transcription involves the recruitment by
DNA-binding activators of multiprotein histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and
Mediator complexes. How these coactivator complexes functionally cooperate and
the roles of the different subunits/modules remain unclear. Here we report
physical interactions between the human HAT complex STAGA
(SPT3-TAF9-GCN5-acetylase) and a "core" form of the Mediator complex during
transcription activation by the MYC oncoprotein. Knockdown of the STAF65gamma
component of STAGA in human cells prevents the stable association of TRRAP and
GCN5 with the SPT3 and TAF9 subunits; impairs transcription of MYC-dependent
genes, including MYC transactivation of the telomerase reverse transcriptase
(TERT) promoter; and inhibits proliferation of MYC-dependent cells. STAF65gamma
is required for SPT3/STAGA interaction with core Mediator and for MYC recruitment
of SPT3, TAF9, and core Mediator components to the TERT promoter but is
dispensable for MYC recruitment of TRRAP, GCN5, and p300 and for acetylation of
nucleosomes and loading of TFIID and RNA polymerase II on the promoter. These
results suggest a novel STAF65gamma-dependent function of STAGA-type complexes in
cell proliferation and transcription activation by MYC postloading of TFIID and
RNA polymerase II that involves direct recruitment of core Mediator.

PMCID: PMC2223283
PMID: 17967894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8729-38. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

CHD8 associates with human Staf and contributes to efficient U6 RNA polymerase
III transcription.

Yuan CC(1), Zhao X, Florens L, Swanson SK, Washburn MP, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Stony Brook University, Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

Chromatin remodeling and histone modification are essential for eukaryotic
transcription regulation, but little is known about chromatin-modifying
activities acting on RNA polymerase III (Pol III)-transcribed genes. The human U6
small nuclear RNA promoter, located 5' of the transcription start site, consists 
of a core region directing basal transcription and an activating region that
recruits the transcription factors Oct-1 and Staf (ZNF143). Oct-1 activates
transcription in part by helping recruit core binding factors, but nothing is
known about the mechanisms of transcription activation by Staf. We show that Staf
activates U6 transcription from a preassembled chromatin template in vitro and
associates with several proteins linked to chromatin modification, among them
chromodomain-helicase-DNA binding protein 8 (CHD8). CHD8 binds to histone H3 di- 
and trimethylated on lysine 4. It resides on the human U6 promoter as well as the
mRNA IRF3 promoter in vivo and contributes to efficient transcription from both
these promoters. Thus, Pol III transcription from type 3 promoters uses some of
the same factors used for chromatin remodeling at Pol II promoters.

PMCID: PMC2169411
PMID: 17938208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Gene. 2007 Oct 15;401(1-2):145-53. Epub 2007 Jul 21.

Transcription factor hStaf/ZNF143 is required for expression of the human TFAM
gene.

Gérard MA(1), Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université Louis Pasteur de Strasbourg,
CNRS, IBMC, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is essential for transcription
initiation and replication of mitochondrial DNA. It was previously reported that 
transcription factors Sp1, NRF-1, NRF-2 were critical for maintaining the normal 
transcription levels of the mammalian TFAM gene. In this work, investigation of
the transcriptional regulation of the human TFAM gene revealed the presence of
two cross-species conserved binding sites for the transcription factor
hStaf/ZNF143. By using promoter binding assays, transient expression of mutant
TFAM reporter gene constructs and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, we
provided insight into the involvement of hStaf/ZNF143 in promoter activity.
Furthermore, we reported the identification of two other functionally important
elements. Altogether, our data led to the conclusion that the promoter of the
human TFAM gene harbors a complex organization with at least six transcriptional 
regulatory elements.

PMID: 17707600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(10):3453-64. Epub 2007 May 3.

Transcription of the human cell cycle regulated BUB1B gene requires hStaf/ZNF143.

Myslinski E(1), Gérard MA, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université Louis Pasteur de Strasbourg,
CNRS, IBMC, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.

BubR1 is a key protein mediating spindle checkpoint activation. Loss of this
checkpoint control results in chromosomal instability and aneuploidy. The
transcriptional regulation of the cell cycle regulated human BUB1B gene, which
encodes BubR1, was investigated in this report. A minimal BUB1B gene promoter
containing 464 bp upstream from the translation initiation codon was sufficient
for cell cycle regulated promoter activity. A pivotal role for transcription
factor hStaf/ZNF143 in the expression of the BUB1B gene was demonstrated through 
gel retardation assays, transient expression of mutant BUB1B promoter-reporter
gene constructs and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Two phylogenetically
conserved hStaf/ZNF143-binding sites (SBS) were identified which are
indispensable for BUB1B promoter activity. In addition, we found that the domain 
covering the transcription start sites contains conserved boxes homologous to
initiator (Inr), cell cycle dependent (CDE) and cell cycle genes homology regions
(CHR) elements. Mutations within the CDE and CHR elements led to diminished cell 
cycle regulation of BUB1B transcription. These results demonstrate that BUB1B
gene transcription is positively regulated by hStaf/ZNF143, a ubiquitously
expressed factor, and that the CDE-CHR tandem element was essential for
G2/M-specific transcription of the BUB1B gene.

PMCID: PMC1904299
PMID: 17478512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 9;26(36):5194-203. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

ZNF143 interacts with p73 and is involved in cisplatin resistance through the
transcriptional regulation of DNA repair genes.

Wakasugi T(1), Izumi H, Uchiumi T, Suzuki H, Arao T, Nishio K, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Zinc-finger protein 143 (ZNF143) is a human homolog of Xenopus transcriptional
activator staf that is involved in selenocystyl tRNA transcription. We previously
showed that ZNF143 expression is induced by treatment with DNA-damaging agents
and that it preferentially binds to cisplatin-modified DNA. In this study, the
potential function of ZNF143 was investigated. ZNF143 was overexpressed in
cisplatin-resistant cells. ZNF143 knockdown in prostate cancer caused increased
sensitivity for cisplatin, but not for oxaliplatin, etoposide and vincristine. We
also showed that ZNF143 is associated with tumor suppressor gene product p73 but 
not with p53. p73 could stimulate the binding of ZNF143 to both ZNF143 binding
site and cisplatin-modified DNA, and modulate the function of ZNF143. We provide 
a direct evidence that both Rad51 and flap endonuclease-1 are target genes of
ZNF143 and overexpressed in cisplatin-resistant cells. Taken together, these
experiments demonstrate that an interplay of ZNF143, p73 and ZNF143 target genes 
is involved in DNA repair gene expression and cisplatin resistance.

PMID: 17297437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 29;281(52):39953-62. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

A genome scale location analysis of human Staf/ZNF143-binding sites suggests a
widespread role for human Staf/ZNF143 in mammalian promoters.

Myslinski E(1), Gérard MA, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UPR CNRS Architecture et
Réactivité de l'ARN, Université Louis Pasteur, 15 Rue René Descartes, 67084
Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Staf was originally identified as the transcriptional activator of Xenopus
tRNA(Sec) and small nuclear (sn) RNA-type genes. Recently, transcription of seven
human (h) protein coding genes was reported to be activated by the human ortholog
hStaf/ZNF143. Here we have used a combined in silico and biochemical approach to 
identify 1175 conserved hStaf/ZNF143-binding sites (SBS) distributed in 938
promoters of four mammalian genomes. The SBS shows a significant positional
preference and occurs mostly within 200 bp upstream of the transcription start
site. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays with 295 of the promoters established 
that 90% contain bona fide SBS. By extrapolating the values of this mapping to
the full sizes of the mammalian genomes, we can infer the existence of at least
2500 SBS distributed in 2000 promoters. This unexpected large number strongly
suggests that SBS constitutes one of the most widespread transcription
factor-binding sites in mammalian promoters. Furthermore, we demonstrated that
the presence of the SBS alone is sufficient to direct expression of a luciferase 
reporter gene, suggesting that hStaf/ZNF143 can recruit per se the transcription 
machinery.

PMID: 17092945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Curr Med Chem Anticancer Agents. 2005 Jan;5(1):15-27.

Cisplatin resistance and transcription factors.

Torigoe T(1), Izumi H, Ishiguchi H, Yoshida Y, Tanabe M, Yoshida T, Igarashi T,
Niina I, Wakasugi T, Imaizumi T, Momii Y, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, School of Medicine, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka
807-8555, Japan.

Cisplatin is one of the most potent and widely used anti-cancer agents in the
treatment of various solid tumors. However, the development of resistance to
cisplatin is a major obstacle in clinical treatment. Several mechanisms are
thought to be involved in cisplatin resistance, including decreased intracellular
drug accumulation, increased levels of cellular thiols, increased nucleotide
excision-repair activity and decreased mismatch-repair activity. In general, the 
molecules responsible for each mechanism are upregulated in cisplatin-resistant
cells; this indicates that the transcription factors activated in response to
cisplatin might play crucial roles in drug resistance. It is known that the
tumor-suppressor proteins p53 and p73, and the oncoprotein c-Myc, which function 
as transcription factors, influence cellular sensitivity to cisplatin. So far, we
have identified several transcription factors involved in cisplatin resistance,
including Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1), CCAAT-binding transcription factor 2
(CTF2), activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), zinc-finger factor 143 (ZNF143)
and mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA). Two of these-YB-1 and
ZNF143-lack the high-mobility group (HMG) domain and can bind preferentially to
cisplatin-modified DNA in addition to HMG domain proteins or DNA repair proteins,
indicating that these transcription factors may also participate in DNA repair.
In this review, we summarize the mechanisms of cisplatin resistance and focus on 
transcription factors involved in the genomic response to cisplatin.

PMID: 15720258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Cancer. 2004 Oct 10;111(6):900-9.

ZNF143 activates gene expression in response to DNA damage and binds to
cisplatin-modified DNA.

Ishiguchi H(1), Izumi H, Torigoe T, Yoshida Y, Kubota H, Tsuji S, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, School of Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan.

We have identified a cisplatin-inducible gene, the mitochondrial ribosomal
protein S11 (MRP S11) gene, by means of mRNA differential display. Functional
analysis of the MRP S11 promoter showed that a Staf binding site in the promoter 
is required for both basal promoter activity and cisplatin-inducible activity. We
also found that Staf binding activity is significantly increased in nuclear
extracts from cells treated with cisplatin. ZNF 143 and ZNF 76 are human
homologues of the Xenopus transcriptional activator, Staf. ZNF 143 expression is 
induced by cisplatin but ZNF 76 expression is not. However, ZNF 143 expression is
not induced by transplatin, which is clinically ineffective. ZNF143 is an
inducible gene by other DNA damaging agents such as gamma-irradiation, etoposide 
and adriamycin. ZNF 143 also binds preferentially to cisplatin-modified DNA.
These results suggest that ZNF 143 participates in cellular responses to DNA
damage.

PMID: 15300802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12190-205. Epub 2003 Dec 31.

ZNF143 mediates basal and tissue-specific expression of human transaldolase.

Grossman CE(1), Qian Y, Banki K, Perl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, College of Medicine, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Transaldolase regulates redox-dependent apoptosis through controlling NADPH and
ribose 5-phosphate production via the pentose phosphate pathway. The minimal
promoter sufficient to drive chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene
activity was mapped to nucleotides -49 to -1 relative to the transcription start 
site of the human transaldolase gene. DNase I footprinting with nuclear extracts 
of transaldolase-expressing cell lines unveiled protection of nucleotides -29 to 
-16. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified a single dominant
DNA-protein complex that was abolished by consensus sequence for transcription
factor ZNF143/76 or mutation of the ZNF76/143 motif within the transaldolase
promoter. Mutation of an AP-2alpha recognition sequence, partially overlapping
the ZNF143 motif, increased TAL-H promoter activity in HeLa cells, without
significant impact on HepG2 cells, which do not express AP-2alpha. Cooperativity 
of ZNF143 with AP-2alpha was supported by supershift analysis of HeLa cells where
AP-2 may act as cell type-specific repressor of TAL promoter activity. However,
overexpression of full-length ZNF143, ZNF76, or dominant-negative DNA-binding
domain of ZNF143 enhanced, maintained, or abolished transaldolase promoter
activity, respectively, in HepG2 and HeLa cells, suggesting that ZNF143 initiates
transcription from the transaldolase core promoter. ZNF143 overexpression also
increased transaldolase enzyme activity. ZNF143 and transaldolase expression
correlated in 21 different human tissues and were coordinately upregulated 14-
and 34-fold, respectively, in lactating mammary glands compared with nonlactating
ones. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies confirm that ZNF143/73 associates
with the transaldolase promoter in vivo. Thus, ZNF143 plays a key role in basal
and tissue-specific expression of transaldolase and regulation of the metabolic
network controlling cell survival and differentiation.

PMID: 14702349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 27;279(9):7734-9. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Human synaptobrevin-like 1 gene basal transcription is regulated through the
interaction of selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating factor-zinc
finger 143 factors with evolutionary conserved cis-elements.

Di Leva F(1), Ferrante MI, Demarchi F, Caravelli A, Matarazzo MR, Giacca M,
D'Urso M, D'Esposito M, Franzé A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati Traverso, Consiglio Nazionale 
delle Ricerche, 80131 Naples, Italy.

The synaptobrevin-like 1 (SYBL1) gene is ubiquitously expressed and codes for an 
unusual member of the v-SNAREs molecules implicated in cellular exocytosis. This 
X-linked gene has the peculiarity of also being present on the Y chromosome in a 
transcriptional inactive status. Moreover, although ubiquitous, the function of
SYBL1 is prominent in specific tissues, such as brain. As a first insight into
the molecular mechanisms controlling SYBL1 expression, in this report we describe
the extent and role of SYBL1 upstream regions and characterize the binding of
trans-acting factors. In vivo foot-printing experiments identify three protected 
regions. Band shift and transient reporter gene assays indicate a strong role of 
two of these evolutionary conserved regions in regulating SYBL1 transcription.
Because one site is the classical CAAT box, we characterized the binding to the
other site of the mammalian homologues of the selenocysteine tRNA gene
transcription activating factor (Staf) family, zinc-finger transcription factors,
and their role in regulating SYBL1 expression. The results reported here clarify 
that a Staf-zinc finger family factor, together with the CAAT factor, is the
major nuclear protein bound to the SYBL1 promoter region and is responsible for
its regulation in HeLa cells, thus identifying the basic control of SYBL1
transcription. In vivo binding of Staf proteins to the SYBL1 promoter is
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Our results identify a fourth 
mRNA promoter stimulated by a member of the Staf-zinc finger family, the function
of which on mRNA polymerase II promoters is still very poorly understood.

PMID: 14672948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Genomics. 2004 Jan;83(1):119-29.

Regulation of aldehyde reductase expression by STAF and CHOP.

Barski OA(1), Papusha VZ, Kunkel GR, Gabbay KH.

Author information: 
(1)Harry B. & Aileen Gordon Diabetes Research Laboratory, Molecular Diabetes &
Metabolism Section, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. obarski@bcm.tmc.edu

Aldehyde reductase is involved in the reductive detoxification of reactive
aldehydes that can modify cellular macromolecules. To analyze the mechanism of
basal regulation of aldehyde reductase expression, we cloned the murine gene and 
adjacent regulatory region and compared it to the human gene. The mouse enzyme
exhibits substrate specificity similar to that of the human enzyme, but with a
2-fold higher catalytic efficiency. In contrast to the mouse gene, the human
aldehyde reductase gene has two alternatively spliced transcripts. A fragment of 
57 bp is sufficient for 25% of human promoter activity and consists of two
elements. The 3' element binds transcription factors of the Sp1 family. Gel-shift
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation as well as deletion/mutation analysis
reveal that selenocysteine tRNA transcription activating factor (STAF) binds to
the 5' element and drives constitutive expression of both mouse and human
aldehyde reductase. Aldehyde reductase thus becomes the fourth protein-encoding
gene regulated by STAF. The human, but not the mouse, promoter also binds C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP), which competes with STAF for the same binding site.
Transfection of the human promoter into ethoxyquin-treated mouse 3T3 cells
induces a 3.5-fold increase in promoter activity and a CHOP-C/EBP band appears on
gel shifts performed with the 5' probe from the human aldehyde reductase
promoter. Induction is attenuated in similar transfection studies of the mouse
promoter. Mutation of the CHOP-binding site in the human promoter abolishes CHOP 
binding and significantly reduces ethoxyquin induction, suggesting that CHOP
mediates stimulated expression in response to antioxidants in the human. This
subtle difference in the human promoter suggests a further evolution of the
promoter toward responsiveness to exogenous stress and/or toxins.

PMID: 14667815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25798-814. Epub 2002 Apr 17.

Complex regulation of human neuronal nitric-oxide synthase exon 1c gene
transcription. Essential role of Sp and ZNF family members of transcription
factors.

Saur D(1), Seidler B, Paehge H, Schusdziarra V, Allescher HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Technische Universität München, Germany.
Saur@lrz.tu-muenchen.de

Neuronal nitric-oxide synthase (nNOS) is expressed in a variety of human tissues 
and shows a complex transcriptional regulation with the presence of nine
alternative first exons (1a-1i) resulting in nNOS transcripts with differing
5'-untranslated regions. We previously demonstrated that nNOS exon 1c, one of the
predominant transcripts in the human gastrointestinal tract, is driven by a
separate promoter (Saur, D., Paehge, H., Schusdziarra, V., and Allescher, H. D.
(2000) Gastroenterology 118, 849-858). The present study focused on the
quantitative expression of nNOS first exon variants in different human tissues
and the characterization of the basal nNOS exon 1c promoter. In human brain,
skeletal muscle, colon, and TGW-nu-I neuroblastoma cells, first exon expression
patterns were analyzed by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR. In
these tissues/cells exon 1c was one of the most abundant first exons of nNOS. By 
transient transfections of TGW-nu-I and HeLa cells with reporter plasmids
containing a series of 5' and 3' deletions in the exon 1c regulatory region, the 
minimal TATA-less promoter was localized within 44 base pairs. Gel mobility shift
assays of this cis-regulatory region revealed a high complexity of the basal
promoter with a cooperative binding of several transcription factors, like Sp and
ZNF family members. When the Sp binding site of the minimal promoter construct
was mutated, promoter activity was completely abolished in both cell lines,
whereas mutation of the common binding site of ZNF76 and ZNF143 resulted in a
decrease of 53% in TGW-nu-I and 37% in HeLa cells. In Drosophila Schneider cells 
expression of Sp1, the long Sp3 isoform, ZNF76 and ZNF143 potently transactivated
the nNOS exon 1c promoter. These results identify the critical regulatory region 
for the nNOS exon 1c basal promoter and stress the functional importance of
multiple protein complexes involving Sp and ZNF families of transcription factors
in regulating nNOS exon 1c transcription.

PMID: 11960979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 15;277(7):4853-8. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

The Small RNA gene activator protein, SphI postoctamer homology-binding
factor/selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating factor, stimulates
transcription of the human interferon regulatory factor-3 gene.

Mach CM(1), Hargrove BW, Kunkel GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843-2128, USA.

Many small nuclear RNA gene promoters are activated by SphI postoctamer homology 
(SPH)-binding factor/selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating factor
(SBF/Staf). Whereas this transcription factor was initially identified by its
ability to bind to SPH elements in such promoters, it was more recently shown to 
have the capacity to activate transcription of a synthetic mRNA gene promoter
through a distinct activation domain. Here, we show that the human interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) gene promoter contains a functional SPH element that 
is bound by SBF/Staf in vitro and in transfected cells.

PMID: 11724783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;93(3-4):277-83.

Comparative architectural aspects of regions of conserved synteny on human
chromosome 11p15.3 and mouse chromosome 7 (including genes WEE1 and LMO1).

Cichutek A(1), Brueckmann T, Seipel B, Hauser H, Schlaubitz S, Prawitt D, Hankeln
T, Schmidt ER, Winterpacht A, Zabel BU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Human chromosome 11p15.3 is associated with chromosome aberrations in the
Beckwith Wiedemann Syndrome and implicated in the pathogenesis of different tumor
types including lung cancer and leukemias. To date, only single tumor-relevant
genes with linkage to this region (e.g. LMO1) have been found suggesting that
this region may harbor additional potential disease associated genes. Although
this genomic area has been studied for years, the exact order of genes/chromosome
markers between D11S572 and the WEE1 gene locus remained unclear. Using the FISH 
technique and PAC clones of the flanking markers we determined the order of the
genomic markers. Based on these clones we established a PAC contig of the
respective region. To analyse the chromosome area in detail the synteny of the
orthologous region on distal mouse chromosome 7 was determined and a
corresponding mouse clone contig established, proving the conserved order of the 
genes and markers in both species: "cen-WEE1-D11S2043-ZNF143-RANBP7-CEGF1-
ST5-D11S932-LMO1-D11S572-TUB-tel", with inverted order of the murine genes with
respect to the telomere/centromere orientation. The region covered by these
contigs comprises roughly 1.6 MB in human as well as in mouse. The genomic
sequence of the two subregions (around WEE1 and LMO1) in both species was
determined using a shotgun sequencing strategy. Comparative sequence analysis
techniques demonstrate that the content of repetitive elements seems to decline
from centromere to telomere (52.6% to 34.5%) in human and in the corresponding
murine region from telomere to centromere (41.87% to 27.82%). Genomic
organisation of the regions around WEE1 and LMO1 was conserved, although the
length of gene regions varied between the species in an unpredictable ratio. CpG 
islands were found conserved in putative promoter regions of the known genes but 
also in regions which so far have not been described as harboring expressed
sequences.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11528126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jun 15;29(12):2502-9.

An unusually compact external promoter for RNA polymerase III transcription of
the human H1RNA gene.

Myslinski E(1), Amé JC, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS 'Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance', Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 15 rue René
Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

H1 RNA, the RNA component of the human nuclear RNase P, is encoded by a unique
gene transcribed by RNA polymerase III (Pol III). In this work, cis-acting
elements and trans-acting factors involved in human H1 gene transcription were
characterized by transcription assays of mutant templates and DNA binding assays 
of recombinant proteins. Four elements, lying within 100 bp of 5'-flanking
sequences, were defined to be essential for maximal in vitro and in vivo
expression, consisting of the octamer, Staf, proximal sequence element (PSE) and 
TATA motifs. These are also encountered in the promoter elements of vertebrate
snRNA genes, where the first two constitute the distal sequence element (DSE). In
all the genes examined so far, the DSE is distant from the PSE and TATA box that 
compose the basal promoter. However, we observed a fundamental difference in the 
organization of the H1 RNA and snRNA gene promoters with respect to the relative 
spacing of the DSE and PSE. Indeed, the H1 promoter is unusually compact, with
the octamer motif and Staf binding site adjacent to the PSE and TATA motifs. It
thus appears that the human RNase P RNA gene has adopted a unique promoter
strategy placing the DSE immediately adjacent to the basal promoter.

PMCID: PMC55750
PMID: 11410657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 15;275(37):28641-8.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse cytosolic chaperonin subunit gene
Ccta/t-complex polypeptide 1 by selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating
factor family zinc finger proteins.

Kubota H(1), Yokota S, Yanagi H, Yura T.

Author information: 
(1)HSP Research Institute, Kyoto Research Park, Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto 600-8813,
Japan. hkubota@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The chaperonin containing t-complex polypeptide 1 (CCT) is a molecular chaperone 
assisting in the folding of proteins in eukaryotic cytosol, and the Ccta
(encoding the alpha subunit of CCT)/t-complex polypeptide 1 gene encodes the
alpha subunit of CCT. We show here that transcription of the mouse Ccta gene is
regulated by selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating factor (Staf)
family zinc-finger transcription factors ZNF143 and ZNF76. Reporter gene assay
using HeLa cells indicated that the Ccta gene promoter contains two 18-base
pair-long cis-acting elements with similar sequences at -70 and -20 base pairs
(designated CCT alpha subunit gene transcription activating element 1 (CAE1) and 
CAE2, respectively). By yeast one-hybrid screening of CAE1-binding factors, we
isolated human ZNF143, which is known to activate transcription of selenocysteine
tRNA and small nuclear RNA genes. DNA binding domains of ZNF143 and ZNF76
produced in E. coli recognized CAE1 and CAE2 elements in electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. HeLa cell nuclear extract contained a protein that specifically
binds to CAE1 and CAE2 and recognized by anti-ZNF143 antibody. Transcription from
a minimal Ccta promoter containing CAE2 element in HeLa cells was enhanced by
overexpression of full-length ZNF143 and ZNF76 but inhibited by that of their DNA
binding domains alone. These results demonstrate that the Staf family proteins
control transcription of at least one of the chaperone-encoding genes besides
that of tRNA and small nuclear RNA genes. These RNA and chaperone genes are
suggested to be coregulated to facilitate synthesis of mature proteins during
active cell growth.

PMID: 10893243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Gene. 2000 Apr 18;247(1-2):33-44.

In vivo footprinting studies suggest a role for chromatin in transcription of the
human 7SK gene.

Boyd DC(1), Greger IH, Murphy S.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Pathology Unit, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of
Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, UK.

Mutation and deletion analyses of mammalian class III small nuclear RNA genes
transcribed by RNA polymerase (pol) III have defined three functional promoter
elements: a distal sequence element (DSE) at around -220, a proximal sequence
element (PSE) at around -60 and a TATA box at around -30. Although binding
studies have identified factors that bind to these sites in vitro, it is not
known exactly how proteins interact with the promoters of these genes in vivo. In
this study, we have used dimethyl sulphate and DNase I treatment of HeLa cells
and nuclei, respectively, followed by linker-mediated polymerase chain reaction, 
to obtain in vivo footprints of proteins binding to the promoter of the Pol
III-transcribed 7SK gene. Our results show that most of the characterised
promoter elements of this gene are protected in vivo in these cells, and the
pattern of DNase I protection suggests that a nucleosome lies between the DSE and
the PSE. Methylation protection was also seen upstream of the DSE over a sequence
corresponding to the binding site of a POZ domain-containing protein, ZID, which 
interacts with components of histone deacetylase complexes. These findings
suggest that chromatin structure plays a role in the cascade of protein-DNA
interactions that regulate expression of this pol III-transcribed gene.

PMID: 10773442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 May 15;28(10):2114-21.

Structural organization of Staf-DNA complexes.

Schaub M(1), Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS 'Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance', IBMC, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

The transactivator Staf, which contains seven contiguous zinc fingers of the
C(2)-H(2)type, exerts its effects on gene expression by binding to specific
targets in vertebrate small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and snRNA-type gene promoters.
Here, we have investigated the interaction of the Staf zinc finger domain with
the optimal Xenopus selenocysteine tRNA (xtRNA(Sec)) and human U6 snRNA (hU6)
Staf motifs. Generation of a series of polypeptides containing increasing numbers
of Staf zinc fingers tested in binding assays, by interference techniques and by 
binding site selection served to elucidate the mode of interaction between the
zinc fingers and the Staf motifs. Our results provide strong evidence that zinc
fingers 3-6 represent the minimal zinc finger region for high affinity binding to
Staf motifs. Furthermore, we show that the binding of Staf is achieved through a 
broad spectrum of close contacts between zinc fingers 1-6 and xtRNA(Sec)or
optimal sites or between zinc fingers 3-6 and the hU6 site. Extensive DNA major
groove contacts contribute to the interaction with Staf that associates more
closely with the non-template than with the template strand. Based on these
findings and the structural information provided by the solved structures of
other zinc finger-DNA complexes, we propose a model for the interaction between
Staf zinc fingers and the xtRNA(Sec), optimal and hU6 sites.

PMCID: PMC105361
PMID: 10773080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 27;274(35):25042-50.

Maximization of selenocysteine tRNA and U6 small nuclear RNA transcriptional
activation achieved by flexible utilization of a Staf zinc finger.

Schaub M(1), Myslinski E, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)"Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de Reconnaissance,"
UPR 9002 du CNRS, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 15 rue René
Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Transcriptional activators Staf and Oct-1 play critical roles in the activation
of small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and snRNA-type gene transcription. Recently, we
established that Staf binding to the human U6 snRNA (hU6) and Xenopus
selenocysteine tRNA (xtRNA(Sec)) genes requires different sets of the seven C2-H2
zinc fingers. In this work, using a combination of oocyte microinjection,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and missing nucleoside experiments with
wild-type and mutant promoters, we demonstrate that the hU6 gene requires zinc
fingers 2-7 for Staf binding and Oct-1 for maximal transcriptional activity. In
contrast, the xtRNA(Sec) gene needs the binding of the seven Staf zinc fingers,
but not Oct-1, for optimal transcriptional capacity. Mutation in the binding site
for Staf zinc finger 1 in the tRNA(Sec) promoter reduced both Staf binding and
transcriptional activity. Conversely, introduction of a zinc finger 1 binding
site in the hU6 promoter increased Staf binding but interfered with the
simultaneous Staf and Oct-1 binding, thus reducing transcriptional activity.
Collectively, these results show that the differential utilization of Staf zinc
finger 1 represents a new, critical determinant of the transcriptional activation
mechanism for the Xenopus tRNA(Sec) and human U6 snRNA genes.

PMID: 10455183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 20;274(34):24241-9.

Flexible zinc finger requirement for binding of the transcriptional activator
staf to U6 small nuclear RNA and tRNA(Sec) promoters.

Schaub M(1), Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance, IBMC, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

The transactivator Staf, which contains seven zinc finger motifs, exerts its
effect on gene expression by binding to specific targets in small nuclear RNA
(snRNA) and snRNA-type gene promoters. In this work, binding site selection
allowed us to identify the 21-base pair ATTACCCATAATGCATYGCGG sequence as the
high affinity consensus binding site for Staf. It shows a high sequence
divergence with Staf-responsive elements in the Xenopus selenocysteine tRNA
(tRNA(Sec)) and human U6 snRNA promoters. By using a combination of approaches,
we analyzed the interaction of wild-type and truncated Staf zinc finger domains
with the consensus, Xenopus tRNA(Sec), and human U6 sites. Two main conclusions
emerged from our data. First, the data clearly indicate that zinc finger 7 does
not establish base-specific contacts in Staf-DNA complexes. The second conclusion
concerns zinc finger 1, which is required for the binding to the Xenopus
tRNA(Sec) site but is dispensable in the case of the human U6 site. Taking into
account the sequence differences in the two sites, these findings demonstrate
that Staf utilizes zinc finger 1 in a rather flexible manner, illustrating how a 
protein can interact with DNAs containing targets of different sequences.

PMID: 10446199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Nov 1;26(21):4846-52.

Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding human SPH-binding factor, a conserved
protein that binds to the enhancer-like region of the U6 small nuclear RNA gene
promoter.

Rincon JC(1), Engler SK, Hargrove BW, Kunkel GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

Many vertebrate small nuclear RNA gene promoters contain an SPH motif in their
distal control regions that can confer transcriptional stimulation by RNA
polymerase II or RNA polymerase III. Using the human U6 gene SPH motif as a
probe, we isolated a cDNA encoding human SPH-binding factor (hSBF) from a HeLa
cell expression library. The coding region of hSBF is almost identical to ZNF143,
a 626 amino acid, seven zinc finger protein of previously unknown function.
Furthermore, the predicted amino acid sequence of hSBF is highly homologous to
Xenopus laevis and mouse Staf proteins, that bind to SPH motifs and stimulate
transcription of selenocysteine tRNA gene promoters. Recombinant hSBF expressed
in vitro or from Escherichia coli bound specifically to the human U6 gene SPH
motif as shown by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
using various mutant SPH sites as competitors. Antibodies prepared against
recombinant hSBF inhibited assembly of native SBF-DNA complexes. Immunodepleted
HeLa S100 transcription extract no longer supported elevated levels of
transcription by RNA polymerase III from a U6 promoter containing an SPH motif,
whereas addition of recombinant hSBF protein to the immunodepleted extract
reconstituted stimulated transcription.

PMCID: PMC147939
PMID: 9776743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 21;273(34):21998-2006.

ZNF76 and ZNF143 are two human homologs of the transcriptional activator Staf.

Myslinski E(1), Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS "Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance," IBMC, 15, rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

The transcriptional activator Staf, originally identified in Xenopus laevis, is
implicated in the enhanced transcription of small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and
snRNA-type genes by RNA polymerases II (Pol II) and III (Pol III). This zinc
finger protein also possesses the capacity to stimulate expression from a Pol II 
mRNA promoter. Here, we report a study on two human proteins, ZNF76 and ZNF143,
that are 64 and 84% identical to their Xenopus counterpart, respectively.
Northern blot analysis revealed that ZNF76 and ZNF143 mRNAs were expressed in all
normal adult tissues examined. By using in vivo and in vitro assays, we have
analyzed the DNA binding capacities and transcriptional properties of ZNF76 and
ZNF143. The binding affinities of ZNF76 and ZNF143 for Staf divergent responsive 
elements were determined by gel shift assays, which revealed that the two
proteins bound a same DNA motif with similar affinities. Also, polypeptide
sequences containing the seven zinc fingers of ZNF76 and ZNF143 could efficiently
repress in vivo the activated transcription from an snRNA-type promoter.
Transfection experiments in Drosophila cells showed that ZNF76 and ZNF143 can
activate transcription from an mRNA promoter through the Staf binding site.
Finally, chimeric ZNF76 and ZNF143 proteins, carrying a heterologous DNA binding 
domain, are able to activate a Pol II mRNA promoter and snRNA Pol II and Pol III 
promoters in Xenopus oocytes, through the heterologous DNA binding site. Taken
together, these findings demonstrate that ZNF76 and ZNF143 are two members of a
same family of transactivator proteins. ZNF143 constitutes the human ortholog of 
the Xenopus Staf, and ZNF76 is a novel DNA binding protein related to Staf and
ZNF143.

PMID: 9705341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):8598-606.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the murine staf cDNA encoding a
transcription activating factor for the selenocysteine tRNA gene in mouse mammary
gland.

Adachi K(1), Saito H, Tanaka T, Oka T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

We have isolated and characterized a cDNA encoding a transcription activating
factor for the mouse selenocysteine tRNA (tRNAsec) gene from mouse mammary gland.
The full-length cDNA, designated m-Staf, has a 1878-base pair open reading frame 
encoding 626 amino acids. The predicted amino acid sequence of m-Staf is highly
homologous to that of Staf, another selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription
activating factor of Xenopus laevis. Like Staf, m-Staf contains seven tandemly
repeated zinc fingers and four repeated motifs. Gel shift assays indicated that
the recombinant m-Staf specifically bound to the activator element region in the 
mouse tRNAsec gene. Transient co-transfection experiments in Drosophila Schneider
cells, which lack endogenous Staf-like binding activity, showed that m-Staf
increased the mouse tRNAsec gene transcription about 15-fold, whereas it
stimulated Pol II-dependent thymidine kinase promoter only 2-fold. Northern blot 
analysis detected the presence of a 3.4-kilobase pair m-Staf transcript, which
was widely but differentially expressed in various murine tissues. The binding
activity of m-Staf in mouse mammary gland was undetectable during virgin and
postlactating periods but increased markedly in parallel with the increase of
tRNAsec transcript during the periods of pregnancy and lactation, when the gland 
undergoes growth and development. These results indicate that m-Staf is a
transcriptional activator of the mouse tRNAsec gene and that its binding activity
in the mammary gland undergoes developmental alterations.

PMID: 9535833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2650-8.

Two distinct domains in Staf to selectively activate small nuclear RNA-type and
mRNA promoters.

Schuster C(1), Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance, IBMC, Strasbourg, France.

Staf is a transcriptional activator of prime importance for enhanced
transcription of small nuclear (snRNA) and snRNA-type genes transcribed by RNA
polymerases II and III (Pol II and III). In addition to this activity, it also
possesses the capacity to stimulate expression from an RNA polymerase II mRNA
promoter. This promiscuous activator thus provides a useful model system for
studying the mechanism by which one single transcription factor can activate a
large variety of promoters. Here, we report the use of in vivo assays to identify
the Staf activation domains involved in promoter selectivity. Analysis of Staf
mutants reveals the existence of two physically and functionally distinct
regions, outside of the DNA binding domain, responsible for mediating selective
transcriptional activation. While a 93-amino-acid domain, with the striking
presence of four repeated units, is specialized for transcriptional activation of
an mRNA promoter, a segment of only 18 amino acids, with a critical Leu-213
residue, acts specifically on Pol II and Pol III snRNA and snRNA-type promoters. 
In addition, this study disclosed the fundamental importance of invariant leucine
and aspartic acid residues located in each repeat unit of the mRNA activation
domain. Staf is therefore the first transcriptional activator described so far to
harbor two physically and functionally distinct activator domains. This finding
suggests that the same activator can contact different, specialized transcription
complexes formed on different types of basal promoters through promoter-specific 
transactivation pathways.

PMCID: PMC110644
PMID: 9566884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. EMBO J. 1997 Jan 2;16(1):173-81.

Staf, a promiscuous activator for enhanced transcription by RNA polymerases II
and III.

Schaub M(1), Myslinski E, Schuster C, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance, IBMC, Strasbourg, France.

Staf is a zinc finger protein that we recently identified as the transcriptional 
activator of the RNA polymerase III-transcribed selenocysteine tRNA gene. In this
work we demonstrate that enhanced transcription of the majority of vertebrate
snRNA and snRNA-type genes, transcribed by RNA polymerases II and III, also
requires Staf. DNA binding assays and microinjection of mutant genes into Xenopus
oocytes showed the presence of Staf-responsive elements in the genes for human
U4C, U6, Y4 and 7SK, Xenopus U1b1, U2, U5 and MRP and mouse U6 RNAs. Using
recombinant Staf, we established that it mediates the activating properties of
Staf-responsive elements on RNA polymerase II and III snRNA promoters in vivo.
Lastly a 19 bp consensus sequence for the Staf binding site,
YY(A/T)CCC(A/G)N(A/C)AT(G/C)C(A/C)YY-RCR, was derived by binding site selection. 
It enabled us to identify 23 other snRNA and snRNA-type genes carrying potential 
Staf binding sites. Altogether, our results emphasize the prime importance of
Staf as a novel activator for enhanced transcription of snRNA and snRNA-type
genes.

PMCID: PMC1169624
PMID: 9009278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. EMBO J. 1995 Aug 1;14(15):3777-87.

Staf, a novel zinc finger protein that activates the RNA polymerase III promoter 
of the selenocysteine tRNA gene.

Schuster C(1), Myslinski E, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance, IBMC, Strasbourg, France.

The selenocysteine tRNA gene (tRNA(Sec)) is atypical. Though transcribed by RNA
polymerase III like all other tRNA genes, its basal promoter elements are
distinct and reside essentially upstream of the coding region. In addition,
transcription from the basal promoter is activated by a 15 bp activator element. 
In this report we describe the cloning and functional characterization of Staf
(selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating factor), a novel Xenopus
laevis transcription factor which binds to the tRNA(Sec) activator element and
mediates its activation properties. The 600 amino acid Staf protein contains
seven zinc fingers and a separate acidic activation domain. Seven highly
conserved regions were detected between Staf and human ZNF76, a protein of
unknown function, thereby aiding in predicting the locations of the functional
domains of Staf. With the use of a novel expression assay in X.laevis oocytes we 
succeeded in demonstrating that Staf can activate the RNA polymerase III promoter
of the tRNA(Sec) gene. This constitutes the first demonstration of the capacity
of a cloned factor to activate RNA polymerase III transcription in vivo.

PMCID: PMC394452
PMID: 7641696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Genomics. 1995 May 20;27(2):259-64.

Isolation and fine mapping of 16 novel human zinc finger-encoding cDNAs identify 
putative candidate genes for developmental and malignant disorders.

Tommerup N(1), Vissing H.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Center for Human Genome Research, John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup.

We have isolated and chromosomally fine-mapped 16 novel genes belonging to the
human zinc finger Krüppel family (ZNF131-140, 142, 143, 148, 151, 154, and 155), 
including 1 of the GLI type (ZNF143) and 3 containing a KRAB (Krüppel-associated 
box) segment (ZNF133, 136, and 140). Based on their map position, several of
these ZNF genes are putative candidate genes for both developmental and malignant
disorders: ZNF138, ZNF139, and ZNF143 were localized to 7q11.2, 7q21.3-q22.1, and
11p15.3-p15.4, regions involved in deletions and/or translocations associated
with Williams syndrome, split hand and foot disease (SHFD1), and
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, respectively. ZNF133 was localized to 20p11.2, close
to, but probably distinct from, the region deleted in Alagille syndrome. Zinc
finger genes mapping to regions commonly deleted in solid tumors included ZNF132,
134, 135, 137, 154, and 155, all located on 19q13 (thyroid adenoma), and ZNF151, 
at 1p36.1-p36.2 (neuroblastoma, colon cancer, and other tumors). In addition,
several of the ZNFs mapped to regions implicated in recurrent chromosomal
rearrangements in hematological malignancies (ZNF139, 7q21.3-q22.1; ZNF148,
3q21-q22; ZNF151, 1p36.1-p36.2). The study indicates that the number of ZNF genes
in human is large and that systematic isolation and mapping of ZNF genes is a
straightforward approach for the identification of novel candidate disease genes.

PMID: 7557990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


