
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Apr 15;52(8):1413-22. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.01.003. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Identification of Rhit as a novel transcriptional repressor of human Mpv17-like
protein with a mitigating effect on mitochondrial dysfunction, and its
transcriptional regulation by FOXD3 and GABP.

Iida R(1), Ueki M, Yasuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui,
Fukui 910-1193, Japan. riida@u-fukui.ac.jp

Mpv17-like protein (M-LP) is a protein that has been suggested to be involved in 
the metabolism of reactive oxygen species. To elucidate the molecular basis of
M-LP expression, we recently searched for regulatory elements of M-LP and
identified a novel mouse KRAB-containing protein, Rhit (regulator of heat-induced
transcription), as a repressor of the transcriptional regulation of M-LP. In this
study, we identified zinc-finger protein 205 as a candidate human Rhit (RhitH)
and subsequently confirmed its participation in transcriptional regulation of
human M-LP (M-LPH). To clarify the functions of RhitH and M-LPH, we searched for 
cis-regulatory elements in the promoter region of RhitH and identified two
transcription factors: forkhead box D3, as a negative regulatory element, and
GA-binding protein, one of the key regulators of the mitochondrial electron
transport system, as a positive regulatory element. Additionally, it was
demonstrated that knockdown of RhitH or overexpression of M-LPH reduces the
generation of intracellular H(2)O(2) and loss of mitochondrial membrane potential
caused by an inhibitor of the respiratory chain, antimycin A. These results
suggest that M-LPH functions to protect cells from oxidative stress and/or
initiation of the mitochondrial apoptotic cascade under stressed conditions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22306510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Genomics. 1998 Oct 1;53(1):97-103.

Identification of two Krüppel-related zinc finger genes (ZNF200 and ZNF210) from 
human chromosome 16p13.3.

Deng Z(1), Centola M, Chen X, Sood R, Vedula A, Fischel-Ghodsian N, Kastner DL.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892-1820, USA.

During the course of cloning the gene for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), we 
identified a number of transcripts from a 275-kb genomic region on 16p13.3. Two
of the transcripts were found to contain multiple C2H2-type zinc finger motifs in
tandem arrays, indicating that they are members of the Krüppel-type family. One
transcript was found to be an alternatively spliced form of a previously reported
zinc finger gene, ZNF200. The other transcript, ZNF210, is 2017 bp and encodes an
open reading frame of 504 aa. Northern blot analysis indicates that ZNF210 is
expressed in all the tissues tested with the highest expression in heart,
skeletal muscle, pancreas, prostate, ovary, and colon. On the other hand, the
strongest expression of ZNF200 is in testis, with very low levels in all the
other tissues tested. Sequence analysis reveals eight C2H2 zinc finger motifs at 
the C-terminus of ZNF210 and five in ZNF200. In addition, ZNF210 also possesses a
Krüppel-associated box at its N-terminus, indicating that it might function as a 
transcription repressor. The intron-exon structures of both genes were determined
and showed that ZNF210 has seven exons while the coding part of ZNF200 is
distributed in four exons. The locations of ZNF200 and ZNF210 are 10 and 120 kb
telomeric to the FMF gene, respectively.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9787081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


