
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8237. [Epub ahead of print]

Oncogenic protein SALL4 and ZNF217 as prognostic indicators in solid cancers: a
meta-analysis of individual studies.

Cheng J(1), Gao J(2), Shuai X(2), Tao K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: SALL4 and ZNF217 have been widely acknowledged as pivotal effectors
stimulating embryonic immortalization as well as oncogenicity. Nevertheless,
their prognostic worthiness towards solid tumors remains obscure. Hence we
performed this comprehensive meta-analysis aiming to unveil the survival
significance of both aberrantly expressed proteins.
RESULTS: Overall we included 22 eligible entries comprising of 3093 participants.
Over-expression of SALL4 and ZNF217 were negatively correlated with clinical
prognosis of 3-year, 5-year, 10-year and disease-free survival in solid
malignancies, irrespective of cancer types, source regions, mean-age and sex
predominance. Results of sensitivity analysis additionally verified the stability
of the pooled outcomes. No publication bias was observed on the basis of Egger's 
test and Begg's test.
METHODS: Studies were eventually included via database searching and rigorous
eligibility appraisal. Data extraction and methodological assessment were
implemented under a standard manner. Review Manager 5.3 and STATA 12.0 were
utilized as statistical platforms following the recommendations by Cochrane
Collaboration protocols.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant amplification of SALL4 and ZNF217 serve as unfavorable
predictors of survival expectancy among cancer sufferers, revealing great
potential as targeted spots in future therapeutics.

PMID: 27007163  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cancer Cell Int. 2015 Dec 15;15:117. doi: 10.1186/s12935-015-0267-0. eCollection 
2015.

Potential targets for ovarian clear cell carcinoma: a review of updates and
future perspectives.

Matsuzaki S(1), Yoshino K(1), Ueda Y(1), Matsuzaki S(1), Kakuda M(1), Okazawa
A(1), Egawa-Takata T(1), Kobayashi E(1), Kimura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871 Japan.

Advances in surgical and medical treatments for ovarian cancer have improved
prognoses. Platinum drugs in particular are pivotal for the medical treatment of 
ovarian cancer. However, previous studies have revealed that some histological
subtypes, such as clear cell carcinoma, are resistant to medical treatment,
including that with platinum drugs. Consequently, the clinical prognosis of
advanced clear cell carcinoma is remarkably inferior, primarily because of its
chemoresistant behavior. The prevalence of clear cell carcinoma is approximately 
5 % in the West, but in Japan, its prevalence is particularly high, at
approximately 25 %. Current medical treatments for advanced clear cell carcinoma 
are difficult to administer, and they have poor efficacy, warranting the
development of novel target-based therapies. In this review, we describe medical 
treatments for clear cell carcinoma and discuss future prospects for therapy. In 
particular, we focus on the mechanism of platinum resistance in clear cell
carcinoma, including the role of annexin A4, one of the most investigated factors
of platinum resistance, as well as the mutant genes and overexpressed proteins
such as VEGF, PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway, ARID1A, hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1ß, ZNF217. We also review targeted molecular therapeutics for epithelial 
ovarian cancer and discuss their role in clear cell carcinoma treatment. We
review the drugs targeting angiogenesis (bevacizumab, sorafenib, and pazopanib), 
growth factors (gefitinib, erlotinib, lapatinib, trastuzumab, and AMG479), and
signaling pathways (temsirolimus, dasatinib, and imatinib), and other drugs
(oregovomab, volociximab, and iniparib). This current review summarizes and
discusses the clinical significance of these factors in ovarian clear cell
carcinoma as well as their potential mechanisms of action. It may provide new
integrative understanding for future studies on their exact role in ovarian clear
cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4678619
PMID: 26675567  [PubMed]


3. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 8;6(39):41566-81. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5893.

The dark side of ZNF217, a key regulator of tumorigenesis with powerful biomarker
value.

Cohen PA(1,)(2,)(3), Donini CF(1,)(2,)(3), Nguyen NT(1,)(2,)(3), Lincet
H(1,)(2,)(3), Vendrell JA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)ISPB, Faculté de Pharmacie, Lyon, France. (2)Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France. 
(3)INSERM U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon,
France.

The recently described oncogene ZNF217 belongs to a chromosomal region that is
frequently amplified in human cancers. Recent findings have revealed that
alternative mechanisms such as epigenetic regulation also govern the expression
of the encoded ZNF217 protein. Newly discovered molecular functions of ZNF217
indicate that it orchestrates complex intracellular circuits as a new key
regulator of tumorigenesis. In this review, we focus on recent research on
ZNF217-driven molecular functions in human cancers, revisiting major hallmarks of
cancer and highlighting the downstream molecular targets and signaling pathways
of ZNF217. We also discuss the exciting translational medicine investigating
ZNF217 expression levels as a new powerful biomarker, and ZNF217 as a candidate
target for future anti-cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC4747174
PMID: 26431164  [PubMed - in process]


4. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167(12):3011-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37344. Epub 2015
Sep 3.

A microdeletion encompassing PHF21A in an individual with global developmental
delay and craniofacial anomalies.

Labonne JD(1,)(2), Vogt J(3), Reali L(3), Kong IK(4), Layman LC(1,)(2,)(5), Kim
HG(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Reproductive Endocrinology, Infertility and Genetics, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia. (3)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service,
Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Animal 
Science, Division of Applied Life Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Physiology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.

In Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), the full phenotypic spectrum is manifested
when deletions are at least 2.1<U+2009>Mb in size at 11p11.2. The PSS-associated genes
EXT2 and ALX4, together with PHF21A, all map to this region flanked by markers
D11S1393 and D11S1319. Being proximal to EXT2 and ALX4, a 1.1<U+2009>Mb region
containing 12 annotated genes had been identified by deletion mapping to explain 
PSS phenotypes except multiple exostoses and parietal foramina. Here, we report a
male patient with partial PSS phenotypes including global developmental delay,
craniofacial anomalies, minor limb anomalies, and micropenis. Using microarray,
qPCR, RT-qPCR, and Western blot analyses, we refined the candidate gene region,
which harbors five genes, by excluding two genes, SLC35C1 and CRY2, which
resulted in a corroborating role of PHF21A in developmental delay and
craniofacial anomalies. This microdeletion contains the least number of genes at 
11p11.2 reported to date. Additionally, we also discuss the phenotypes observed
in our patient with respect to those of published cases of microdeletions across 
the Potocki-Shaffer interval. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26333423  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Jul;35(7):1024-7, 1033.

[Lentivirus-mediated shRNA targeting ZNF217 suppresses cell growth, migration,
and invasion of glioma cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo Q(1), Huang H, Deng Y, Huang H, Fu H, Luo K, Li C, Qin C, Wei Z, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical College
for Nationalities, Bose 533000, China.E-mail: luoqish@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of ZNF217 in regulating cell proliferation,
migration and invasion in glioma cells.
METHDOS: A lentivirus-mediated shRNA-ZNF217 vector was infected into glioma U251 
cells, and the interference efficiency was examined by Western blotting. MTT
assay, flow cytometry, Transwell assay, and Boyden chamber assay were used to
analyze the changes in cell proliferation, migration and invasion. Western
blotting was used to detect the changes in ZNF217-related genes in the cells.
RESULTS: shRNA-ZNF217 transfection significantly inhibited the expression of
ZNF217 in U251 cells and suppressed the cell migration, invasion, growth, and
cell cycle transition. ZNF217 knockdown downregulated the expression of pPI3,
pAKT, C-Myc, and the mesenchyme biomarker N-cadherin, and stimulated the
expression of the epithelium biomarker E-cadherin.
CONCLUSION: ZNF217 promotes cell migration, invasion, and growth by activating
PI3K/AKT signal to upregulate C-Myc and by modulating the genes associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in glioma cells.

PMID: 26198954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FEBS J. 2015 Sep;282(17):3424-37. doi: 10.1111/febs.13352. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Detection of novel germline mutations for breast cancer in non-BRCA1/2 families.

Aloraifi F(1), McDevitt T(2), Martiniano R(1), McGreevy J(1), McLaughlin R(1),
Egan CM(1), Cody N(2), Meany M(2), Kenny E(3), Green AJ(2), Bradley DG(1),
Geraghty JG(4), Bracken AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland. (2)National
Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady's Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland.
(3)TrinSeq, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland. (4)St. Vincent University Hospital, 
Dublin 4, Ireland.

The identification of the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2
enhanced clinicians' ability to select high-risk individuals for aggressive
surveillance and prevention, and led to the development of targeted therapies.
However, BRCA1/2 mutations account for only 25% of familial breast cancer cases. 
To systematically identify rare, probably pathogenic variants in familial cases
of breast cancer without BRCA1/2 mutations, we developed a list of 312 genes, and
performed targeted DNA enrichment coupled to multiplex next-generation sequencing
on 104 'BRCAx' patients and 101 geographically matched controls in Ireland. As
expected, this strategy allowed us to identify mutations in several well-known
high-susceptibility and moderate-susceptibility genes, including ATM (~ 5%),
RAD50 (~ 3%), CHEK2 (~ 2%), TP53 (~ 1%), PALB2 (~ 1%), and MRE11A (~ 1%).
However, we also identified novel pathogenic variants in 30 other genes, which,
when taken together, potentially explain the etiology of the missing heritability
in up to 35% of BRCAx patients. These included novel potential pathogenic
mutations in MAP3K1, CASP8, RAD51B, ZNF217, CDKN2B-AS1, and ERBB2, including a
splice site mutation, which we predict would generate a constitutively active
HER2 protein. Taken together, this work extends our understanding of the genetics
of familial breast cancer, and supports the need to implement hereditary
multigene panel testing to more appropriately orientate clinical management.

© 2015 FEBS.

PMID: 26094658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul;36(7):4905-12. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3567-z. Epub 2015
Jun 16.

DNA methylation as a promising landscape: A simple blood test for breast cancer
prediction.

Khakpour G(1), Pooladi A, Izadi P, Noruzinia M, Tavakkoly Bazzaz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women worldwide. Risk
assessment is one of the main services delivered by cancer clinics. Biomarker
analysis on different tissues including the peripheral blood can provide crucial 
information. One of the potential epigenetic biomarkers (epimarkers) is
introduced as the peripheral blood DNA methylation pattern. This study was
conducted to evaluate the potential value of peripheral blood epimarkers as an
accessible tool to predict the risk of breast cancer development. WBC's DNA was
the focus of several case-control studies at both genome wide and candidate gene 
levels to reveal epigenetic changes accounting for predisposition to breast
cancer, leading to suggest that ATM, TITF1, SFRP1, NUP155, NEUROD1, ZNF217, DBC2,
DOK7 and ESR1 genes and the LINE1, Alu and Sat2 DNA elements could be considered 
as the potential epimarkers. To address that by which mechanisms WBC's DNA
methylation patterns could be linked to the propensity to breast cancer, several 
contemplations have been offered. Constitutional epimutation during embryonic
life, and methylation changes secondary to either environmental exposures or
tumor-mediated immune response, are the two main mechanisms. One can deduce that 
epimarkers based on their potential properties or regulatory impacts on
cancer-related genes may be employed for risk prediction, prognosis, and survival
inferences that are highly required for breast cancer management toward
personalized medicine.

PMID: 26076810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Jun 5. doi: 10.1111/dote.12372. [Epub ahead of print]

Fluorescence in situ hybridization identifies high risk Barrett's patients likely
to develop esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Brankley SM(1), Halling KC(1), Jenkins SM(2), Timmer MR(3), Iyer PG(3), Smyrk
TC(1), Barr Fritcher EG(1), Voss JS(1), Kipp BR(1), Campion MB(1), Lutzke LS(3), 
Minot DM(1), Wang KK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA. (2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) with high-grade dysplasia (HGD) defines a group of
individuals at high risk of progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has been shown to be useful for the
detection of dysplasia and EA in endoscopic brushing specimens from BE patients. 
The aim of this study was to determine whether FISH in combination with
histological findings would further identify more rapid progressors to EA. This
is a retrospective cohort study of high-risk patients, having a history of
biopsy-confirmed HGD without EA, with an endoscopic brushing specimen analyzed by
FISH while undergoing endoscopic surveillance and treatment between April 2003
and October 2010. Brushing specimens were assessed by FISH probes targeting 8q24 
(MYC), 9p21 (CDKN2A), 17q12 (ERBB2), and 20q13 (ZNF217) and evaluated for the
presence of polysomy, defined as multiple chromosomal gains (displaying = 3
signals for = 2 probes). Specimens containing = 4 cells exhibiting polysomy were 
considered polysomic. HGD was confirmed by at least two experienced
gastrointestinal pathologists. Of 245 patients in this study, 93 (38.0%) had a
polysomic FISH result and 152 (62.0%) had a non-polysomic FISH result. Median
follow-up was 3.6 years (interquartile range [IQR] 2-5 years). Patients with a
polysomic FISH result had a significantly higher risk of developing EA within 2
years (14.2%) compared with patients with a non-polysomic FISH result (1.4%, P < 
0.001). These findings suggest that a polysomic FISH result in BE patients with
simultaneous HGD identifies patients at a higher risk for developing EA compared 
with those with non-polysomy.

© 2015 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 26043762  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 20;6(17):15578-93.

Short-term expansion of breast circulating cancer cells predicts response to
anti-cancer therapy.

Khoo BL(1), Lee SC(2,)(3), Kumar P(4), Tan TZ(3), Warkiani ME(5,)(6), Ow SG(2),
Nandi S(4), Lim CT(4,)(5,)(7,)(8), Thiery JP(3,)(4,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Hematology-Oncology, National University Cancer Institute,
National University Hospital, Singapore. (3)Cancer Science Institute of
Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore. (4)Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research),
Singapore. (5)BioSystems and Micromechanics (BioSyM) IRG, Singapore-MIT Alliance 
for Research and Technology (SMART) Centre, Singapore. (6)School of Mechanical
and Manufacturing Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. 
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. (8)Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. (9)Department of Biochemistry Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are considered as surrogate markers for
prognosticating and evaluating patient treatment responses. Here, 226 blood
samples from 92 patients with breast cancer, including patients with newly
diagnosed or metastatic refractory cancer, and 16 blood samples from healthy
subjects were cultured in laser-ablated microwells. Clusters containing an
increasing number of cytokeratin-positive (CK+) cells appeared after 2 weeks,
while most blood cells disappeared with time. Cultures were heterogeneous and
exhibited two distinct sub-populations of cells: 'Small' (= 25 µm; high
nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio; CD45-) cells, comprising CTCs, and 'Large' (> 25 µm;
low nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio; CD68+ or CD56+) cells, corresponding to macrophage
and natural killer-like cells. The Small cell fraction also showed copy number
increases in six target genes (FGFR1, Myc, CCND1, HER2, TOP2A and ZNF217)
associated with breast cancer. These expanded CTCs exhibited different
proportions of epithelial-mesenchymal phenotypes and were transferable for
further expansion as spheroids in serum-free suspension or 3D cultures. Cluster
formation was affected by the presence and duration of systemic therapy, and its 
persistence may reflect therapeutic resistance. This novel and advanced method
estimates CTC clonal heterogeneity and can predict, within a relatively short
time frame, patient responses to therapy.

PMCID: PMC4558172
PMID: 26008969  [PubMed - in process]


10. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11652-63.

LncRNA-ATB promotes trastuzumab resistance and invasion-metastasis cascade in
breast cancer.

Shi SJ(1), Wang LJ(2), Yu B(1), Li YH(1), Jin Y(1), Bai XZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Administration and Department of Aristogenesis, No. 202 Hospital
of PLA, No. 5, Shenyang, 110003, Liaoning Province, P.R. China. (2)Department of 
Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi Province, P.R. China.

Trastuzumab resistance is leading cause of mortality in HER2-positive breast
cancers, and the role of TGF-ß-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
trastuzumab resistance is well established, but the involvement of lncRNAs in
trastuzumab resistance is still unknown. Here, we generated trastuzumab-resistant
breast cancer cells with increased invasiveness compared with parental cells, and
observed robust epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and consistently elevated
TGF-ß signaling in these cells. We identified long noncoding RNA activated by
TGF-ß (lnc-ATB) was the most remarkably upregulated lncRNA in TR SKBR-3 cells and
the tissues of TR breast cancer patients. We found that lnc-ATB could promote
trastuzumab resistance and invasion-metastasis cascade in breast cancer by
competitively biding miR-200c, up-regulating ZEB1 and ZNF-217, and then inducing 
EMT. In addition, we also found that the high level of lnc-ATB was correlated
with trastuzumab resistance of breast cancer patients. Thus, these findings
suggest that lncRNA-ATB, a mediator of TGF-ß signaling, could predispose breast
cancer patients to EMT and trastuzumab resistance.

PMCID: PMC4484483
PMID: 25871474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(6):2459-63.

ZNF217 is overexpressed and enhances cell migration and invasion in colorectal
carcinoma.

Zhang ZC(1), Zheng LQ, Pan LJ, Guo JX, Yang GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China E-mail : zzc3726@163.com.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the expression and clinical significance of zinc
finger protein 217 (ZNF217) in human colorectal carcinoma (CRC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of ZNF217 in 60 CRC tissues and matched
tumor adjacent tissues, collected between January 2013 and June 2014, was
assessed immunohistochemically. The relationship between the expression of ZNF217
and clinicopathlogical features was analyzed by Pearson chi-square test. In
addition, siRNA was used to down-regulate the expression of ZNF217 in CRC cells. 
The effects of ZNF217 for cell migration and invasion were measured by wound
healing assay and transwell assay, respectively.
RESULTS: The expression level of ZNF217 was significantly higher in CRC tissues
than in tumor adjacent tissues (p<0.05), positively correlating with tumor size, 
lymphatic metastasis and advanced TNM stage (p<0.05). Down-regulation of ZNF217
in CRC cells could significantly suppress cell migration and invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: ZNF217 is overexpressed in colorectal carcinoma tissues and is
associated with tumor malignant clinicopathological features. ZNF217 may promote 
CRC progression by inducing cell migration and invasion.

PMID: 25824781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Histopathology. 2015 Oct;67(4):451-6. doi: 10.1111/his.12679. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Aneusomy detected by fluorescence in-situ hybridization has high positive
predictive value for Barrett's dysplasia.

Allan EA(1), Miller R(2), Going JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. (2)Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS, Glasgow,
UK. (3)Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.

AIMS: The goal of this study was to pilot a commercial four-colour fluorescence
in-situ hybridization (FISH) probe set as a marker of dysplasia in surveillance
biopsies.
METHODS AND RESULTS: FISH probes to 9p12 (CDKN2A), 17q11.2-12 (HER2), 8q24.12-13 
(CMYC) and 20q13.2 (ZNF217) in 20 cases of Barrett's oesophagus. Dysplastic and
non-dysplastic mucosa were compared for each case. Two observers independently
counted 50 cells in each region of interest (ROI), and the mean score taken.
Wilcoxon's signed-rank test was used to determine the significance of differences
between dysplastic and non-dysplastic tissue. Predictive power was determined by 
logistic regression and receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves were
plotted to examine sensitivity and specificity of each gene to detect dysplasia. 
Interobserver agreement was excellent. HER2, CMYC and ZNF217 showed significant
(P < 0.0005) increases in copy number in dysplastic mucosa; CDKN2A had an
insignificant (P = 0.852) decrease when compared to non-dysplastic mucosa. While 
aneusomy was strongly predictive of dysplasia, eusomy did not rule it out.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased HER2, CMYC and ZNF217 copy number distinguished dysplastic
from non-dysplastic mucosa, but non-detection of aneusomy did not exclude
dysplasia. Further studies are justified to determine whether FISH-positive
dysplasia might justify earlier treatment by radio-frequency ablation.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25735914  [PubMed - in process]


13. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Jan 23;14(1):362-7. doi: 10.4238/2015.January.23.9.

Effect of ZNF217 gene polymorphisms on colorectal cancer development in a Mexican
population.

Ramírez-Ramírez R(1), Gutiérrez-Angulo M(1), Magaña MT(2), Moreno-Ortiz JM(1),
Partida-Pérez M(1), Muñiz-Mendoza R(1), Peregrina-Sandoval J(3),
Suárez-Villanueva AS(1), Centeno-Flores M(4), Maciel-Gutiérrez VM(4),
Cabrales-Vazquez E(5), Ayala-Madrigal ML(6).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Genética Humana and Doctorado en Genética Humana, CUCS,
Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco, México. (2)División de
Genética, CIBO, IMSS, Guadalajara, Jalisco, México. (3)Laboratorio de
Inmunobiología, CUCBA, Universidad de Guadalajara, Zapopan, Jalisco, México.
(4)Servicio de Colon y Recto, "Juan I. Menchaca" Hospital Civil, Guadalajara,
Jalisco, México. (5)Servicio de Oncología "Fray Antonio Alcalde" Hospital Civil, 
Guadalajara, Jalisco, México. (6)Instituto de Genética Humana and Doctorado en
Genética Humana, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco, México
ayama1624@yahoo.com.mx.

The ZNF217 gene, a potential oncogene amplified and overexpressed in several
cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC), acts as a transcription factor that
activates or represses target genes. The polymorphisms rs16998248 (T>A) and
rs35720349 (C>T) in coronary artery disease have been associated with reduced
expression of ZNF217. In this study, we analyzed the 2 polymorphisms in Mexican
patients with CRC. Genotyping of rs16998248 and rs35720349 sites was performed by
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism in 203 Mexican
Mestizos, 101 CRC patients, and 102 healthy blood donors. Although no statistical
differences regarding genotype and allele frequencies of ZNF217 polymorphisms
were observed (P > 0.05), linkage disequilibrium was significant in CRC patients 
(r(2) = 0.39, P < 0.0001), as a result of reduced AC haplotype frequency. Thus,
the AC haplotype may protect against CRC.

PMID: 25729968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0116977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116977.
eCollection 2015.

Somatic copy number alterations associated with Japanese or endometriosis in
ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma.

Okamoto A(1), Sehouli J(2), Yanaihara N(1), Hirata Y(1), Braicu I(2), Kim BG(3), 
Takakura S(1), Saito M(1), Yanagida S(1), Takenaka M(1), Yamaguchi N(1), Morikawa
A(1), Tanabe H(1), Yamada K(1), Yoshihara K(4), Enomoto T(4), Itamochi H(5),
Kigawa J(5), Matsumura N(6), Konishi I(6), Aida S(7), Aoki Y(8), Ishii N(8),
Ochiai K(1), Akiyama T(7), Urashima M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jikei University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Charité University
Hospital, Berlin, Germany. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Niigata University Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan. (5)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago, Japan. (6)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto, Japan. (7)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Pharmaceutical Research Department 2, Research Division, Chugai Pharmaceutical
Co., Ltd., Kamakura, Japan. (9)Division of Molecular Epidemiology, Jikei
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

When compared with other epithelial ovarian cancers, the clinical characteristics
of ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma (CCC) include 1) a higher incidence among
Japanese, 2) an association with endometriosis, 3) poor prognosis in advanced
stages, and 4) a higher incidence of thrombosis as a complication. We used high
resolution comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) to identify somatic copy
number alterations (SCNAs) associated with each of these clinical characteristics
of CCC. The Human Genome CGH 244A Oligo Microarray was used to examine 144
samples obtained from 120 Japanese, 15 Korean, and nine German patients with CCC.
The entire 8q chromosome (minimum corrected p-value: q = 0.0001) and chromosome
20q13.2 including the ZNF217 locus (q = 0.0078) were amplified significantly more
in Japanese than in Korean or German samples. This copy number amplification of
the ZNF217 gene was confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(Q-PCR). ZNF217 RNA levels were also higher in Japanese tumor samples than in
non-Japanese samples (P = 0.027). Moreover, endometriosis was associated with
amplification of EGFR gene (q = 0.047), which was again confirmed by Q-PCR and
correlated with EGFR RNA expression. However, no SCNAs were significantly
associated with prognosis or thrombosis. These results indicated that there may
be an association between CCC and ZNF217 amplification among Japanese patients as
well as between endometriosis and EGFR gene amplifications.

PMCID: PMC4319764
PMID: 25658832  [PubMed - in process]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 26;10(1):e0116170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116170.
eCollection 2015.

MiR-203 suppresses ZNF217 upregulation in colorectal cancer and its oncogenicity.

Li Z(1), Du L(1), Dong Z(1), Yang Y(1), Zhang X(1), Wang L(1), Li J(1), Zheng
G(1), Qu A(1), Wang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong Province, China.

Zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) is essential for cell proliferation and has been
implicated in tumorigenesis. However, its expression and exact roles in
colorectal cancer (CRC) remain unclear. In this study, we demonstrated that
ZNF217 expression was aberrantly upregulated in CRC tissues and associated with
poor overall survival of CRC patients. In addition, we found that ZNF217 was a
putative target of microRNA (miR)-203 using bioinformatics analysis and confirmed
that using luciferase reporter assay. Moreover, in vitro knockdown of ZNF217 or
enforced expression of miR-203 attenuated CRC cell proliferation, invasion and
migration. Furthermore, combined treatment of ZNF217 siRNA and miR-203 exhibited 
synergistic inhibitory effects. Taken together, our results provide new evidences
that ZNF217 has an oncogenic role in CRC and is regulated by miR-203, and open up
the possibility of ZNF217- and miR-203-targeted therapy for CRC.

PMCID: PMC4306553
PMID: 25621839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;26(3):118-24. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2014.12.004.
Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Functional genomics of PCOS: from GWAS to molecular mechanisms.

McAllister JM(1), Legro RS(2), Modi BP(3), Strauss JF 3rd(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Penn State Hershey College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, 
USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Penn State Hershey College of
Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA. Electronic address: jmcallister@psu.edu.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Penn State Hershey College of
Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrinopathy characterized by
increased ovarian androgen biosynthesis, anovulation, and infertility. PCOS has a
strong heritable component based on familial clustering and twin studies.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified several PCOS candidate loci
including LHCGR, FSHR, ZNF217, YAP1, INSR, RAB5B, and C9orf3. We review the
functional roles of strong PCOS candidate loci focusing on FSHR, LHCGR, INSR, and
DENND1A. We propose that these candidates comprise a hierarchical signaling
network by which DENND1A, LHCGR, INSR, RAB5B, adapter proteins, and associated
downstream signaling cascades converge to regulate theca cell androgen
biosynthesis. Future elucidation of the functional gene networks predicted by the
PCOS GWAS will result in new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for women with
PCOS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4346470
PMID: 25600292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Hum Pathol. 2014 Nov;45(11):2318-25. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.07.020. Epub
2014 Aug 16.

Chromosome 20q13.2 ZNF217 locus amplification correlates with decreased
E-cadherin expression in ovarian clear cell carcinoma with PI3K-Akt pathway
alterations.

Huang HN(1), Huang WC(2), Lin CH(3), Chiang YC(4), Huang HY(5), Kuo KT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 10002; Department of Pathology, National Taiwan
University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan, 30059. (2)Department of
Anatomic Pathology, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 22060.
(3)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 10002. (4)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 10002. (5)Department of
Mathematics Education, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 11605.
(6)Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 10002; Department of Pathology, National Taiwan
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan, 10002. Electronic address: pathologykimo@gmail.com.

This study aims to evaluate the relationships between chromosome 20q13.2 zinc
finger protein 217 (ZNF217) locus amplification, ZNF217 expression, E-cadherin
expression, and PI3K-Akt pathway alterations (activating PIK3CA mutations or loss
of phosphatase and tensin homolog [PTEN] expression), and whether these molecular
alterations can predict the clinical survival data in ovarian clear cell
carcinoma (OCCC) patients. Samples and clinical data of 72 OCCC patients were
collected. Chromosome 20q13.2 ZNF217 locus amplification was detected by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. ZNF217, E-cadherin and PTEN expression were
assessed using immunohistochemical stain. PIK3CA mutation was identified by
PCR-amplified gene sequencing. Cox proportional hazard regression model was used 
to estimate the adjusted hazard ratios of survival. Chromosome 20q13.2 ZNF217
locus amplification was detected in 31% (22/72) of cases, and ZNF217 expression
was increased in 40% (27/68) of cases. E-cadherin and PTEN expressions were
decreased or lost in 44% (32/72) and 14% (10/72) of cases, respectively.
Activating PIK3CA mutations were present in 35% (25/72) of cases. Thirty-three
OCCC patients (46%) showed activating PI3K-Akt pathway alterations. Chromosome
20q13.2 ZNF217 locus amplification was significantly associated with decreased
E-cadherin expression (P = .001). In contrast, ZNF217 expression was not related 
to ZNF217 amplification or E-cadherin expression. In OCCC patients with
activating PI3k-Akt pathway, decreased E-cadherin expression (P = .033) and
advanced Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage (P = .014) predicted
shorter overall survival. Two conclusions were raised in our study. First, ZNF217
plays a role in down-regulating E-cadherin expression and is a potential
therapeutic target for OCCC patients. Second, E-cadherin expression is a
prognostic marker for OCCC patients with activating PI3K-Akt pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25281027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Anticancer Res. 2014 Sep;34(9):4813-7.

Prognostic significance of ZNF217 expression in gastric carcinoma.

Shida A(1), Fujioka S(2), Kurihara H(3), Ishibashi Y(2), Mitsumori N(2), Omura
N(2), Yanaga K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
atsuoshida@ybb.ne.jp. (2)Department of Surgery, Jikei University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Surgery, Kanagawa Prefectural Shiomidai 
Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The zinc finger protein ZNF217 is a candidate oncogene in breast
cancer and ovarian clear cell cancer. The purpose of the present study was to
clarify the significance of this protein's expression in gastric carcinoma and to
evaluate the outcome of these patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using paraffin-embedded specimens from 84 patients with
gastric cancer, ZNF217 protein was detected using an anti-ZNF217 goat polyclonal 
antibody. We evaluated the ZNF217 protein expression in relation to patient
outcome and clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: The ZNF217 protein was expressed in 34 (40.5%) tumor sections. Patients 
with ZNF217-negative tumors had better relapse-free survival (RFS) and overall
survival (OS) than those with ZNF217-positive tumors by the log-rank test.
Notably, multivariate analysis indicated that ZNF217 was an independent
prognostic factor for RFS.
CONCLUSION: ZNF217 expression seems to be a novel prognostic biomarker in gastric
cancer.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25202062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gastrointest Endosc. 2014 Dec;80(6):984-91. doi: 10.1016/j.gie.2014.06.023. Epub 
2014 Jul 29.

Prediction of response to endoscopic therapy of Barrett's dysplasia by using
genetic biomarkers.

Timmer MR(1), Brankley SM(2), Gorospe EC(3), Sun G(3), Lutzke LS(3), Iyer PG(3), 
Halling KC(2), Krishnadath KK(4), Wang KK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA; Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. (3)Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Gastrointest Endosc. 2014 Dec;80(6):992-4.

BACKGROUND: Endoscopic therapy for the treatment of high-grade dysplasia (HGD)
and intramucosal cancer (IMC) in Barrett's esophagus (BE) may not always result
in complete remission of dysplasia (CRD).
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether genetic alterations in the Barrett's mucosa can
predict response to endoscopic therapy.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Tertiary-care institution.
PATIENTS: Selected patients who underwent endoscopic therapy for BE containing
HGD/IMC between 2003 and 2010.
INTERVENTIONS: Endoscopic therapy combining mucosal resection and different
ablation modalities was performed based on patient characteristics, endoscopic
findings, and technique evolution. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was used to
evaluate genetic alterations on baseline endoscopic cytology brushings by using
probes directed to loci 8q24 (MYC), 9p21 (CDKN2A; alias P16), 17q12 (ERBB2; alias
Her-2/neu), and 20q13.2 (ZNF217).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Genetic biomarkers predicting achievement of CRD after
endoscopic therapy.
RESULTS: A total of 181 patients were included (145 men; 66 ± 10 years of age).
There were 130 patients (72%) who responded to endoscopic therapy with CRD.
Multiple gains detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization was found to be a
negative predictor (hazard ratio 0.57; 95% confidence interval, 0.40-0.82) after 
adjusting for potential clinical confounders. Similar results were found when
analyses were restricted to patients (n = 66) undergoing radiofrequency ablation 
(hazard ratio 0.58; 95% confidence interval, 0.31-1.09).
LIMITATIONS: Retrospective study, heterogeneity of treatment modalities.
CONCLUSION: Patients with multiple gains detected by brush cytology specimens may
have a lower response rate to endoscopic therapy. The presence of multiple gains 
can be an adjunct to standard histology in prognosticating BE patients with
HGD/IMC undergoing endoscopic therapy.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4311726
PMID: 25085335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 May 15;7(6):3038-47. eCollection 2014.

ZNF217 is associated with poor prognosis and enhances proliferation and
metastasis in ovarian cancer.

Li J(1), Song L(1), Qiu Y(1), Yin A(1), Zhong M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University Guangzhou, Guangdong Province 510515, China.

ZNF217 is an alternatively spliced Kruppel-like transcription factor that has
recently been implicated to play a role in human carcinogenesis. Here, we used
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to show that ZNF217 protein is overexpressed in nearly
60% of ovarian tumor samples. The disease-free survival time was shorter in
patients with positive ZNF217 expression than in ZNF217-negative patients
(P=0.042). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis showed ZNF217
genomic amplification in the poorly differentiated tumors, suggesting that ZNF217
is associated with the progression of ovarian cancer. Invasion was enhanced in
HO-8910 cells stably transfected with constructs carrying full-length ZNF217
relative to cells transfected with the empty vector. To confirm our findings in
vivo, we performed a tumorigenicity assay in nude mice inoculated with the
HO-8910 overexpressing ZNF217 cells. As expected, tumors grown in the ZNF217
group were more invasive and prone to metastasis than those formed control
groups. Based on these clinical and laboratory observations, we conclude that
ZNF217 may contribute to ovarian cancer invasion and metastasis, and associated
with worse clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4097264
PMID: 25031722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Oncol. 2014 Dec;8(8):1441-57. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.05.013. Epub 2014
Jun 10.

A functional interplay between ZNF217 and estrogen receptor alpha exists in
luminal breast cancers.

Nguyen NT(1), Vendrell JA(1), Poulard C(2), Gyorffy B(3), Goddard-Léon S(4),
Bièche I(5), Corbo L(2), Le Romancer M(2), Bachelot T(4), Treilleux I(6), Cohen
PA(7).

Author information: 
(1)ISPB, Faculté de Pharmacie, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France;
INSERM U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon,
France. (2)Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France; INSERM U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de
Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon, France. (3)MTA-SE Pediatrics and
Nephrology Research Group, Budapest, Hungary; 2nd Dept. of Pediatrics, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary; MTA TTK Lendület Cancer Biomarker Research Group, 
Budapest, Hungary. (4)Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. (5)Service de Génétique, 
Institut Curie, Paris, France. (6)INSERM U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche
en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon, France; Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. (7)ISPB,
Faculté de Pharmacie, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France; INSERM
U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon, France.
Electronic address: pascale.cohen@univ-lyon1.fr.

We aimed at highlighting the role of ZNF217, a Krüppel-like finger protein, in
Estrogen Receptor-a (ERa)-positive (ER+) and luminal breast cancers. Here we
report for the first time that ZNF217 and ERa proteins bind to each other in both
breast cancer cells and breast tumour samples, via the ERa hinge domain and the
ZNF217 C-terminal domain. ZNF217 enhances the recruitment of ERa to its estrogen 
response elements (ERE) and the ERa-dependent transcription of the GREB1
estrogen-regulated gene. The prognostic power of ZNF217 mRNA expression levels is
most discriminatory in breast cancers classified with a "good prognosis",
particularly the Luminal-A subclass. A new immunohistochemistry ZNF217 index,
based on nuclear and cytoplasmic ZNF217 staining, also allowed the identification
of intermediate/poor relapse-free survivors in the Luminal-A subgroup. ZNF217
confers tamoxifen resistance in ER+ breast cancer cells and is a predictor of
relapse under endocrine therapy in patients with ER+ breast cancer. ZNF217 thus
allows the re-stratification of patients with ER+ breast cancers considered as
cancers with good prognosis where no other biomarkers are currently available and
widely used. Here we propose a model in ER+ breast cancer where ZNF217-driven
aggressiveness incorporates ZNF217 as a positive enhancer of ERa direct genomic
activity and where ZNF217 possesses its highest discriminatory prognostic value.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24973012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:520. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-520.

Global analysis of ZNF217 chromatin occupancy in the breast cancer cell genome
reveals an association with ERalpha.

Frietze S(1), O'Geen H, Littlepage LE, Simion C, Sweeney CA, Farnham PJ, Krig SR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO
80639, USA. seth.frietze@unco.edu.

BACKGROUND: The ZNF217 gene, encoding a C2H2 zinc finger protein, is located at
20q13 and found amplified and overexpressed in greater than 20% of breast tumors.
Current studies indicate ZNF217 drives tumorigenesis, yet the regulatory
mechanisms of ZNF217 are largely unknown. Because ZNF217 associates with
chromatin modifying enzymes, we postulate that ZNF217 functions to regulate
specific gene signaling networks. Here, we present a large-scale functional
genomic analysis of ZNF217, which provides insights into the regulatory role of
ZNF217 in MCF7 breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: ChIP-seq analysis reveals that the majority of ZNF217 binding sites are 
located at distal regulatory regions associated with the chromatin marks H3K27ac 
and H3K4me1. Analysis of ChIP-seq transcription factor binding sites shows
clustering of ZNF217 with FOXA1, GATA3 and ERalpha binding sites, supported by
the enrichment of corresponding motifs for the ERalpha-associated cis-regulatory 
sequences. ERalpha expression highly correlates with ZNF217 in lysates from
breast tumors (n = 15), and ERalpha co-precipitates ZNF217 and its binding
partner CtBP2 from nuclear extracts. Transcriptome profiling following ZNF217
depletion identifies differentially expressed genes co-bound by ZNF217 and
ERalpha; gene ontology suggests a role for ZNF217-ERalpha in expression programs 
associated with ER+ breast cancer studies found in the Molecular Signature
Database. Data-mining of expression data from breast cancer patients correlates
ZNF217 with reduced overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our genome-wide ZNF217 data suggests a functional role for ZNF217 at
ERalpha target genes. Future studies will investigate whether ZNF217 expression
contributes to aberrant ERalpha regulatory events in ER+ breast cancer and
hormone resistance.

PMCID: PMC4082627
PMID: 24962896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Br J Cancer. 2014 Jun 10;110(12):2985-95. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.238. Epub 2014
May 22.

Multi-colour FISH in oesophageal adenocarcinoma-predictors of prognosis
independent of stage and grade.

Geppert CI(1), Rümmele P(2), Sarbia M(3), Langer R(4), Feith M(5), Morrison L(6),
Pestova E(7), Schneider-Stock R(1), Hartmann A(1), Rau TT(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pathology, Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Krankenhausstrasse 8/10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany [2] Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Erlangen-European Metropolitan Region Nuremberg 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg,
Germany. (3)Department of Pathology and Cytology, 80992 Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, University Bern, CH 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technical University Munich, 
81675 Munich, Germany. (6)Ventana Medical Systems, Inc., Oro Valley, AZ 85755,
USA. (7)Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL 60018, USA.

BACKGROUND: Oesophageal adenocarcinoma or Barrett's adenocarcinoma (EAC) is
increasing in incidence and stratification of prognosis might improve disease
management. Multi-colour fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) investigating 
ERBB2, MYC, CDKN2A and ZNF217 has recently shown promising results for the
diagnosis of dysplasia and cancer using cytological samples.
METHODS: To identify markers of prognosis we targeted four selected gene loci
using multi-colour FISH applied to a tissue microarray containing 130 EAC
samples. Prognostic predictors (P1, P2, P3) based on genomic copy numbers of the 
four loci were statistically assessed to stratify patients according to overall
survival in combination with clinical data.
RESULTS: The best stratification into favourable and unfavourable prognoses was
shown by P1, percentage of cells with less than two ZNF217 signals; P2,
percentage of cells with fewer ERBB2- than ZNF217 signals; and P3, overall ratio 
of ERBB2-/ZNF217 signals. Median survival times for P1 were 32 vs 73 months, 28
vs 73 months for P2; and 27 vs 65 months for P3. Regarding each tumour grade P2
subdivided patients into distinct prognostic groups independently within each
grade, with different median survival times of at least 35 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Cell signal number of the ERBB2 and ZNF217 loci showed independence 
from tumour stage and differentiation grade. The prognostic value of multi-colour
FISH-assays is applicable to EAC and is superior to single markers.

PMCID: PMC4056055
PMID: 24853183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Cancer. 2014 Sep 15;135(6):1356-68. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28782. Epub 2014 Mar
3.

MiR-200c suppresses TGF-ß signaling and counteracts trastuzumab resistance and
metastasis by targeting ZNF217 and ZEB1 in breast cancer.

Bai WD(1), Ye XM, Zhang MY, Zhu HY, Xi WJ, Huang X, Zhao J, Gu B, Zheng GX, Yang 
AG, Jia LT.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology Department of Immunology, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Resistance to trastuzumab and concomitantly distal metastasis are leading causes 
of mortality in HER2-positive breast cancers, the molecular basis of which
remains largely unknown. Here, we generated trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer
cells with increased tumorigenicity and invasiveness compared with parental
cells, and observed robust epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
consistently elevated TGF-ß signaling in these cells. MiR-200c, which was the
most significantly downregulated miRNA in trastuzumab-resistant cells, restored
trastuzumab sensitivity and suppressed invasion of breast cancer cells by
concurrently targeting ZNF217, a transcriptional activator of TGF-ß, and ZEB1, a 
known mediator of TGF-ß signaling. Given the reported backward inhibition of
miR-200c by ZEB1, ZNF217 also exerts a feedback suppression of miR-200c via
TGF-ß/ZEB1 signaling. Restoration of miR-200c, silencing of ZEB1 or ZNF217 or
blockade of TGF-ß signaling increased trastuzumab sensitivity and suppressed
invasiveness of breast cancer cells. Therefore, our study unraveled nested
regulatory circuits of miR-200c/ZEB1 and miR-200c/ZNF217/TGF-ß/ZEB1 in
synergistically promoting trastuzumab resistance and metastasis of breast cancer 
cells. These findings provide novel insights into the common role of EMT and
related molecular machinery in mediating the malignant phenotypes of breast
cancers.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24615544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genome Biol. 2013 Dec 17;14(12):r137. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-12-r137.

Integrative DNA methylation and gene expression analysis in high-grade soft
tissue sarcomas.

Renner M, Wolf T, Meyer H, Hartmann W, Penzel R, Ulrich A, Lehner B, Hovestadt V,
Czwan E, Egerer G, Schmitt T, Alldinger I, Renker EK, Ehemann V, Eils R,
Wardelmann E, Büttner R, Lichter P, Brors B, Schirmacher P, Mechtersheimer G.

BACKGROUND: High-grade soft tissue sarcomas are a heterogeneous, complex group of
aggressive malignant tumors showing mesenchymal differentiation. Recently, soft
tissue sarcomas have increasingly been classified on the basis of underlying
genetic alterations; however, the role of aberrant DNA methylation in these
tumors is not well understood and, consequently, the usefulness of
methylation-based classification is unclear.
RESULTS: We used the Infinium HumanMethylation27 platform to profile DNA
methylation in 80 primary, untreated high-grade soft tissue sarcomas,
representing eight relevant subtypes, two non-neoplastic fat samples and 14
representative sarcoma cell lines. The primary samples were partitioned into
seven stable clusters. A classification algorithm identified 216 CpG sites,
mapping to 246 genes, showing different degrees of DNA methylation between these 
seven groups. The differences between the clusters were best represented by a set
of eight CpG sites located in the genes SPEG, NNAT, FBLN2, PYROXD2, ZNF217,
COL14A1, DMRT2 and CDKN2A. By integrating DNA methylation and mRNA expression
data, we identified 27 genes showing negative and three genes showing positive
correlation. Compared with non-neoplastic fat, NNAT showed DNA hypomethylation
and inverse gene expression in myxoid liposarcomas, and DNA hypermethylation and 
inverse gene expression in dedifferentiated and pleomorphic liposarcomas.
Recovery of NNAT in a hypermethylated myxoid liposarcoma cell line decreased cell
migration and viability.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis represents the first comprehensive integration of DNA
methylation and transcriptional data in primary high-grade soft tissue sarcomas. 
We propose novel biomarkers and genes relevant for pathogenesis, including NNAT
as a potential tumor suppressor in myxoid liposarcomas.

PMCID: PMC4054884
PMID: 24345474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mod Pathol. 2014 Jul;27(7):983-90. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.216. Epub 2013 Dec
13.

Loss of ARID1A expression and its relationship with PI3K-Akt pathway alterations 
and ZNF217 amplification in ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Huang HN(1), Lin MC(2), Huang WC(3), Chiang YC(4), Kuo KT(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Graduate Institute of Pathology, Department of Pathology, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Department of Pathology,
Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pathology, National
Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Far Eastern Memorial
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National
Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (5)1] Graduate Institute of Pathology, Department of Pathology,
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Department of
Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

AT-rich interactive domain 1A (ARID1A) is a subunit of switch/sucrose
non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) complex. Recently, alterations of ARID1A gene,
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-protein kinase B (PI3K-Akt) pathway and zinc-finger
protein 217 (ZNF217) gene have been identified as frequent molecular genetic
changes in ovarian clear cell carcinoma. The relationships between these events
have not been studied and integrated in the same cohort. This study was aimed at 
determining the correlation between these molecular events and other
clinicopathological factors, including the prognostic impacts of these
clinicopathological factors. A total of 68 ovarian clear cell carcinoma cases
were collected and subjected to immunohistochemistry testing for ARID1A, SMARCA2,
SMARCA4, SMARCB1 and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), mutation analysis for
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA) 
gene and fluorescence in situ hybridization for ZNF217 amplification. The
correlations between ARID1A expression, PI3K-Akt pathway, ZNF217 amplification
and other clinicopathological factors were analyzed. Loss of ARID1A expression
was present in 35 cases (52%) and loss of SMARCA2 expression occurred in 1 case. 
SMARCA4 and SMARCB1 expressions were preserved in all cases. PIK3CA mutations
were present in 23 cases (34%) and loss of PTEN expression occurred in 8 cases
(12%). Alterations in the PI3K-Akt pathway (PIK3CA mutations or loss of PTEN
expression) were found in 42 cases (62%). ZNF217 amplification was detected in 21
cases (31%). Loss of ARID1A expression was significantly related to younger
patient age (P=0.048), PI3K-Akt pathway activation (P=0.046) and ZNF217
amplification (P=0.028). All of the clinicopathological factors were not
prognostic factors for ovarian clear cell carcinoma after multivariate analysis, 
except International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging (P=0.001).
Our results showed that loss of ARID1A expression usually coexisted with PI3K-Akt
pathway activation and/or ZNF217 amplification. Synergic effects of loss of
ARID1A and PI3K-Akt pathway activation as well as ZNF217 amplification may be
related to the development of ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

PMID: 24336158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 30;8(10):e76251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076251.
eCollection 2013.

Novel genes associated with colorectal cancer are revealed by high resolution
cytogenetic analysis in a patient specific manner.

Eldai H(1), Periyasamy S, Al Qarni S, Al Rodayyan M, Muhammed Mustafa S, Deeb A, 
Al Sheikh E, Afzal M, Johani M, Yousef Z, Aziz MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics, King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/3f97e271-6926-4766-8430-1b4a009e80c6. Afzal Khan, Mohammed
[corrected to Afzal, Mohammed].

Genomic abnormalities leading to colorectal cancer (CRC) include somatic events
causing copy number aberrations (CNAs) as well as copy neutral manifestations
such as loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and uniparental disomy (UPD). We studied the
causal effect of these events by analyzing high resolution cytogenetic microarray
data of 15 tumor-normal paired samples. We detected 144 genes affected by CNAs. A
subset of 91 genes are known to be CRC related yet high GISTIC scores indicate 24
genes on chromosomes 7, 8, 18 and 20 to be strongly relevant. Combining GISTIC
ranking with functional analyses and degree of loss/gain we identify three genes 
in regions of significant loss (ATP8B1, NARS, and ATP5A1) and eight in regions of
gain (CTCFL, SPO11, ZNF217, PLEKHA8, HOXA3, GPNMB, IGF2BP3 and PCAT1) as novel in
their association with CRC. Pathway and target prediction analysis of CNA
affected genes and microRNAs, respectively indicates TGF-ß signaling pathway to
be involved in causing CRC. Finally, LOH and UPD collectively affected nine
cancer related genes. Transcription factor binding sites on regions of >35% copy 
number loss/gain influenced 16 CRC genes. Our analysis shows patient specific CRC
manifestations at the genomic level and that these different events affect
individual CRC patients differently.

PMCID: PMC3813709
PMID: 24204606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078299.
eCollection 2013.

The landscape of candidate driver genes differs between male and female breast
cancer.

Johansson I(1), Ringnér M, Hedenfalk I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund and CREATE Health 
Strategic Center for Translational Cancer Research, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.

The rapidly growing collection of diverse genome-scale data from multiple tumor
types sheds light on various aspects of the underlying tumor biology. With the
objective to identify genes of importance for breast tumorigenesis in men and to 
enable comparisons with genes important for breast cancer development in women,
we applied the computational framework COpy Number and EXpression In Cancer
(CONEXIC) to detect candidate driver genes among all altered passenger genes.
Unique to this approach is that each driver gene is associated with several gene 
modules that are believed to be altered by the driver. Thirty candidate drivers
were found in the male breast cancers and 67 in the female breast cancers. We
identified many known drivers of breast cancer and other types of cancer, in the 
female dataset (e.g. GATA3, CCNE1, GRB7, CDK4). In contrast, only three known
cancer genes were found among male breast cancers; MAP2K4, LHP, and ZNF217. Many 
of the candidate drivers identified are known to be involved in processes
associated with tumorigenesis, including proliferation, invasion and
differentiation. One of the modules identified in male breast cancer was
regulated by THY1, a gene involved in invasion and related to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Furthermore, men with THY1 positive breast
cancers had significantly inferior survival. THY1 may thus be a promising novel
prognostic marker for male breast cancer. Another module identified among male
breast cancers, regulated by SPAG5, was closely associated with proliferation.
Our data indicate that male and female breast cancers display highly different
landscapes of candidate driver genes, as only a few genes were found in common
between the two. Consequently, the pathobiology of male breast cancer may differ 
from that of female breast cancer and can be associated with differences in
prognosis; men diagnosed with breast cancer may consequently require different
management and treatment strategies than women.

PMCID: PMC3806766
PMID: 24194916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2013 Mar;35(3):170-4. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2013.03.003.

[ZNF217 expression correlates with the biological behavior of human ovarian
cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Song LL, Zhong M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of ZNF217 gene expression with the
biological behavior of human ovarian cancer HO-8910 cells.
METHODS: The expression of ZNF217 in ovarian carcinoma cell lines was detected by
RT-PCR and Western blot, respectively. The biological behaviors of the
transfectants were investigated by MTT, in vitro Boyden chamber and in vivo
invasion assay, respectively.
RESULTS: RT-PCR and Western blotting revealed that transfection of ZNF217 into
the HO-8910 cells significantly increased their proliferation along with markedly
enhanced in vitro and in vivo invasion and metastatic abilities. MTT assay showed
that the proliferation ability of pEGFP-N1-ZNF217/HO-8910 cells was significantly
higher than that of pEGFP-N1/HO-8910 cells and HO-8910 cells (P < 0.001). The
Boyden chamber assay showed that the numbers of migrating
pEGFP-N1-ZNF217/HO-8910, pEGFP-N1/HO-8910 and HO-8910 cells were (141.25 ± 13.91)
cells/200×field, (82.50 ± 11.73) cells/200×field and (81.75 ±
12.12)cells/200×field, with a significant difference between them (F = 29.247, P 
< 0.001). The nude mouse experiment showed that the in vivo tumor formation
ability of pEGFP-N1-ZNF217/HO-8910 cells was significantly higher than that of
pEGFP-N1/HO-8910 cells (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: ZNF217 gene plays an important role in the invasion and metastasis
of ovarian cancer. ZNF217 gene expression may be a useful marker indicating
invasion and metastasis of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 23879995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 12;288(15):10616-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441451. Epub
2013 Feb 22.

New insights into DNA recognition by zinc fingers revealed by structural analysis
of the oncoprotein ZNF217.

Vandevenne M(1), Jacques DA, Artuz C, Nguyen CD, Kwan AH, Segal DJ, Matthews JM, 
Crossley M, Guss JM, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, New South Wales, 2006
Australia.

Classical zinc fingers (ZFs) are one of the most abundant and best characterized 
DNA-binding domains. Typically, tandem arrays of three or more ZFs bind DNA
target sequences with high affinity and specificity, and the mode of DNA
recognition is sufficiently well understood that tailor-made ZF-based DNA-binding
proteins can be engineered. We have shown previously that a two-zinc finger unit 
found in the transcriptional coregulator ZNF217 recognizes DNA but with an
affinity and specificity that is lower than other ZF arrays. To investigate the
basis for these differences, we determined the structure of a ZNF217-DNA complex.
We show that although the overall position of the ZFs on the DNA closely
resembles that observed for other ZFs, the side-chain interaction pattern differs
substantially from the canonical model. The structure also reveals the presence
of two methyl-p interactions, each featuring a tyrosine contacting a thymine
methyl group. To our knowledge, interactions of this type have not previously
been described in classical ZF-DNA complexes. Finally, we investigated the
sequence specificity of this two-ZF unit and discuss how ZNF217 might
discriminate its target DNA sites in the cell.

PMCID: PMC3624442
PMID: 23436653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Comput Biol Med. 2013 May;43(4):334-41. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2012.12.002.
Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Learning the local Bayesian network structure around the ZNF217 oncogene in
breast tumours.

Prestat E(1), de Morais SR, Vendrell JA, Thollet A, Gautier C, Cohen PA, Aussem
A.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, 69000, Lyon, France.

In this study, we discuss and apply a novel and efficient algorithm for learning 
a local Bayesian network model in the vicinity of the ZNF217 oncogene from breast
cancer microarray data without having to decide in advance which genes have to be
included in the learning process. ZNF217 is a candidate oncogene located at
20q13, a chromosomal region frequently amplified in breast and ovarian cancer,
and correlated with shorter patient survival in these cancers. To properly
address the difficulties in managing complex gene interactions given our limited 
sample, statistical significance of edge strengths was evaluated using
bootstrapping and the less reliable edges were pruned to increase the network
robustness. We found that 13 out of the 35 genes associated with deregulated
ZNF217 expression in breast tumours have been previously associated with survival
and/or prognosis in cancers. Identifying genes involved in lipid metabolism opens
new fields of investigation to decipher the molecular mechanisms driven by the
ZNF217 oncogene. Moreover, nine of the 13 genes have already been identified as
putative ZNF217 targets by independent biological studies. We therefore suggest
that the algorithms for inferring local BNs are valuable data mining tools for
unraveling complex mechanisms of biological pathways from expression data. The
source code is available at http://www710.univ-lyon1.fr/~aaussem/Software.html.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23375235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Epigenetics. 2013 Feb;8(2):192-202. doi: 10.4161/epi.23400. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Hypoxia alters the epigenetic profile in cultured human placental trophoblasts.

Yuen RK(1), Chen B, Blair JD, Robinson WP, Nelson DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

The mechanisms by which the placenta adapts to exogenous stimuli to create a
stable and healthy environment for the growing fetus are not well known. Low
oxygen tension influences placental function, and is associated with
preeclampsia, a condition displaying altered development of placental
trophoblast. We hypothesized that oxygen tension affects villous trophoblast by
modulation of gene expression through DNA methylation. We used the Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array to compare the DNA methylation profile of
primary cultures of human cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts under < 1%,
8% and 20% oxygen levels. We found no effect of oxygen tension on average DNA
methylation for either cell phenotype, but a set of loci became hypermethylated
in cytotrophoblasts exposed for 24 h to < 1% oxygen, as compared with those
exposed to 8% or 20% oxygen. Hypermethylation with low oxygen tension was
independently confirmed by bisulfite-pyrosequencing in a subset of functionally
relevant genes including CD59, CFB, GRAM3 and ZNF217. Intriguingly, 70 out of the
147 CpGs that became hypermethylated in < 1% oxygen overlapped with CpG sites
that became hypomethylated upon differentiation of cytotrophoblasts into
syncytiotrophoblasts. Furthermore, the preponderance of altered sites was located
at AP-1 binding sites. We suggest that AP-1 expression is triggered by hypoxia
and interacts with DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) to target methylation at
specific sites in the genome, thus causing suppression of the associated genes
that are responsible for differentiation of villous cytotrophoblast to
syncytiotrophoblast.

PMCID: PMC3592905
PMID: 23314690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Pathol. 2012 Nov;181(5):1807-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.012. Epub
2012 Oct 8.

Single-cell genetic analysis of ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive breast
cancer reveals enormous tumor heterogeneity yet conserved genomic imbalances and 
gain of MYC during progression.

Heselmeyer-Haddad K(1), Berroa Garcia LY, Bradley A, Ortiz-Melendez C, Lee WJ,
Christensen R, Prindiville SA, Calzone KA, Soballe PW, Hu Y, Chowdhury SA,
Schwartz R, Schäffer AA, Ried T.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. heselmek@mail.nih.gov

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a precursor lesion of invasive ductal
carcinoma (IDC) of the breast. To understand the dynamics of genomic alterations 
in this progression, we used four multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization
probe panels consisting of the oncogenes COX2, MYC, HER2, CCND1, and ZNF217 and
the tumor suppressor genes DBC2, CDH1, and TP53 to visualize copy number changes 
in 13 cases of synchronous DCIS and IDC based on single-cell analyses. The DCIS
had a lower degree of chromosomal instability than the IDC. Despite enormous
intercellular heterogeneity in DCIS and IDC, we observed signal patterns
consistent with a nonrandom distribution of genomic imbalances. CDH1 was most
commonly lost, and gain of MYC emerged during progression from DCIS to IDC. Four 
of 13 DCISs showed identical clonal imbalances in the IDCs. Six cases revealed a 
switch, and in four of those, the IDC had acquired a gain of MYC. In one case,
the major clone in the IDC was one of several clones in the DCIS, and in another 
case, the major clone in the DCIS became one of the two major clones in the IDC. 
Despite considerable chromosomal instability, in most cases the evolution from
DCIS to IDC is determined by recurrent patterns of genomic imbalances, consistent
with a biological continuum.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3483801
PMID: 23062488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Anticancer Res. 2012 Aug;32(8):3091-5.

Gene amplification of ZNF217 located at chr20q13.2 is associated with lymph node 
metastasis in ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Rahman MT(1), Nakayama K, Rahman M, Katagiri H, Katagiri A, Ishibashi T, Ishikawa
M, Iida K, Nakayama N, Otsuki Y, Nakayama S, Miyazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Shimane University School of Medicine, Shimane,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Recently we reported that amplification of the Zinc Finger Protein
217 (ZNF217) gene adversely affects survival of patients with ovarian clear cell 
carcinoma. This study sought to determine the mechanism by which ZNF217
amplification affects patient survival.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used to
detect ZNF217 gene amplification status and ZNF217-specific siRNA was used to
inactivate ZNF217 for in vitro biological analyses.
RESULTS: We found ZNF217 gene amplification to be significantly correlated with
lymph node metastasis (p<0.05) in ovarian clear cell carcinoma. Profound
inhibition of cell migration and invasion was observed in siRNA-treated cells
with ZNF217 amplification, compared to cells without amplification.
CONCLUSION: These findings provide new insight into the biological role of ZNF217
gene amplification in ovarian clear cell carcinoma. Additionally, our
observations have an important therapeutic implication for patients with ovarian 
clear cell carcinomas with ZNF217 amplification, as these patients may
potentially benefit from ZNF217 targeted-therapy.

PMID: 22843878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;132(4):775-84. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27731. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Identification of ZNF217, hnRNP-K, VEGF-A and IPO7 as targets for microRNAs that 
are downregulated in prostate carcinoma.

Szczyrba J(1), Nolte E, Hart M, Döll C, Wach S, Taubert H, Keck B, Kremmer E,
Stöhr R, Hartmann A, Wieland W, Wullich B, Grässer FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Saarland University Medical School, Homburg/Saar,
Germany.

In primary prostate cancer (PCa), a major cause of cancer-related death in men,
the expression of various microRNAs (miRNAs) is deregulated. We previously
detected several miRNAs, for example, miR-24 and miR-22, as significantly
downregulated in PCa (Szczyrba et al., Mol Cancer Res 2010;8:529-38). An in
silico search predicted that zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) and importin 7
(IPO7) were potential target genes of these miRNAs. Additionally, for two genes
that are deregulated in PCa (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K, hnRNP-K, 
and vascular endothelial growth factor A, VEGF-A), we identified two regulatory
miRNAs, miR-205 and miR-29b. The regulation of the 3'-untranslated regions of the
four genes by their respective miRNAs was confirmed by luciferase assays. As
expected, the upregulation of ZNF217, hnRNP-K, VEGF-A and IPO7 could be verified 
at the protein level in the PCa cell lines LNCaP and DU145. ZNF217 and IPO7,
which had not yet been studied in PCa, were analyzed in more detail. ZNF217 mRNA 
is overexpressed in primary PCa samples, and this overexpression translates to an
elevated protein level. However, IPO7 was upregulated at the protein level alone.
The inhibition of ZNF217 and IPO7 by siRNA resulted in reduced proliferation of
the PCa cell lines. ZNF217 could thus be identified as an oncogene that is
overexpressed in PCa and affects the growth of PCa cell lines, whereas the
function of IPO7 remains to be elucidated in greater detail.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22815235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Discov. 2012 Jul;2(7):638-51. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0093. Epub 2012
May 10.

The transcription factor ZNF217 is a prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target 
during breast cancer progression.

Littlepage LE(1), Adler AS, Kouros-Mehr H, Huang G, Chou J, Krig SR, Griffith OL,
Korkola JE, Qu K, Lawson DA, Xue Q, Sternlicht MD, Dijkgraaf GJ, Yaswen P, Rugo
HS, Sweeney CA, Collins CC, Gray JW, Chang HY, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The transcription factor ZNF217 is a candidate oncogene in the amplicon on
chromosome 20q13 that occurs in 20% to 30% of primary human breast cancers and
that correlates with poor prognosis. We show that Znf217 overexpression drives
aberrant differentiation and signaling events, promotes increased self-renewal
capacity, mesenchymal marker expression, motility, and metastasis, and represses 
an adult tissue stem cell gene signature downregulated in cancers. By in silico
screening, we identified candidate therapeutics that at low concentrations
inhibit growth of cancer cells expressing high ZNF217. We show that the
nucleoside analogue triciribine inhibits ZNF217-induced tumor growth and
chemotherapy resistance and inhibits signaling events [e.g., phospho-AKT,
phospho-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)] in vivo. Our data suggest that
ZNF217 is a biomarker of poor prognosis and a therapeutic target in patients with
breast cancer and that triciribine may be part of a personalized treatment
strategy in patients overexpressing ZNF217. Because ZNF217 is amplified in
numerous cancers, these results have implications for other cancers.SIGNIFICANCE:
This study finds that ZNF217 is a poor prognostic indicator and therapeutic
target in patients with breast cancer and may be a strong biomarker of
triciribine treatment efficacy in patients. Because previous clinical trials for 
triciribine did not include biomarkers of treatment efficacy, this study provides
a rationale for revisiting triciribine in the clinical setting as a therapy for
patients with breast cancer who overexpress ZNF217.

PMCID: PMC3546490
PMID: 22728437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 15;72(14):3593-606. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3095. Epub
2012 May 16.

ZNF217 is a marker of poor prognosis in breast cancer that drives
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and invasion.

Vendrell JA(1), Thollet A, Nguyen NT, Ghayad SE, Vinot S, Bièche I, Grisard E,
Josserand V, Coll JL, Roux P, Corbo L, Treilleux I, Rimokh R, Cohen PA.

Author information: 
(1)ISPB, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France.

The Krüppel-like zinc finger protein ZNF217 is a candidate oncogene in breast
cancer. In this study, we showed that high levels of expression of ZNF217 mRNA
are associated with poor prognosis and the development of metastases in breast
cancer. Overexpression of ZNF217 in breast cancer cells stimulated migration and 
invasion in vitro and promoted the development of spontaneous lung or node
metastases in mice in vivo. ZNF217 also promoted epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in human mammary epithelial cells, and the TGF-ß-activated Smad 
signaling pathway was identified as a major driver of ZNF217-induced EMT. In
addition, a TGF-ß autocrine loop sustained activation of the TGF-ß pathway in
ZNF217-overexpressing mammary epithelial cells, most likely because of
ZNF217-mediated direct upregulation of TGFB2 or TGFB3. Inhibition of the TGF-ß
pathway led to the reversal of ZNF217-mediated EMT. Together, our findings
indicate that ZNF217 mRNA expression may represent a novel prognostic biomarker
in breast cancer. Therapeutic targeting of ZNF217 of the TGF-ß signaling pathway 
may benefit the subset of patients whose tumors express high levels of ZNF217.

PMID: 22593193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell. 2012 Jun 8;46(5):636-49. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.03.027. Epub 2012
May 3.

TGF-ß-dependent active demethylation and expression of the p15ink4b tumor
suppressor are impaired by the ZNF217/CoREST complex.

Thillainadesan G(1), Chitilian JM, Isovic M, Ablack JN, Mymryk JS, Tini M,
Torchia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON,
Canada.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2012 Jun 8;46(5):556-7.

In this study we examine the mechanisms of dynamic DNA methylation of the
p15(ink4b) tumor suppressor gene. Using conventional ChIP and ChiPseq, we
identify the p15(ink4b) promoter as a target for the ZNF217 oncogene, the CoREST 
complex, and DNMT3A. Treatment of cells with TGF-ß triggers active demethylation 
involving loss of ZNF217/CoREST/DNMT3A and the corecruitment of SMAD2/3, CBP, and
the DNA glycosylase TDG. Knockdown of TDG, or its functional homolog MBD4,
prevents TGF-ß-dependent demethylation of p15(ink4b). DNA immunoprecipitation of 
5mC and 5hmC indicates that 5mC undergoes conversion to 5hmC prior to activation 
of p15(ink4b). Remarkably, overexpression of ZNF217 inhibits active demethylation
and expression of the p15(ink4b) gene by preventing recruitment of SMAD2/3 and
TDG. These findings suggest that active demethylation is essential for regulating
a subset of TGF-ß-dependent genes. Importantly, disruption of active
demethylation by the ZNF217 oncogene may be a paradigm for other oncogenic
signals on DNA methylation dynamics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22560925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cancer Genet. 2012 Apr;205(4):138-46. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.001.

Are ER+PR+ and ER+PR- breast tumors genetically different? A CGH array study.

Carracedo A(1), Salido M, Corominas JM, Rojo F, Ferreira BI, Suela J, Tusquets I,
Corzo C, Segura M, Espinet B, Cigudosa JC, Arumi M, Albanell J, Serrano S, Solé
F.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Service, Molecular Cytogenetics Laboratory, Hospital del Mar, IMIM, 
Barcelona, Spain.

The estrogen receptor (ER) is a well-known predictor of breast cancer response to
endocrine therapy. ER+ progesterone receptor (PR)- breast tumors have a poorer
response to endocrine therapy and a more aggressive phenotype than ER+PR+ tumors.
A comparative genomic hybridization array technique was used to examine 25 ER+PR+
and 23 ER+PR- tumors. Tissue microarrays composed of 50 ER+PR+ and 50 ER+PR-
tumors were developed to validate the comparative genomic hybridization array
results. The genes of interest were analyzed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The ER+PR- group had a slightly different genomic profile when
compared with ER+PR+ tumors. Chromosomes 17 and 20 contained the most overlapping
gains, and chromosomes 3, 8, 9, 14, 17, 21, and 22 contained the most overlapping
losses when compared with the ER+PR+ group. The gained regions, 17q23.2-q23.3 and
20q13.12, and the lost regions, 3p21.32-p12.3, 9pter-p13.2, 17pter-p12, and
21pter-q21.1, occurred at different alteration frequencies and were statistically
significant in the ER+PR- tumors compared with the ER+PR+ tumors. ER+PR- breast
tumors have a different genomic profile compared with ER+PR+ tumors.
Differentially lost regions in the ER+PR- group included genes with tumor
suppressor functions and genes involved in apoptosis, mitosis, angiogenesis, and 
cell spreading. Differentially gained regions included genes such as MAP3K3,
RPS6KB1, and ZNF217. Amplification of these genes could contribute to resistance 
to apoptosis, increased activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, and the loss of 
PR in at least some ER+PR- tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22559974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Front Genet. 2011 Feb 16;2:3. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2011.00003. eCollection 2011.

Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in the Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 (IGF-1) Gene 
are Associated with Performance in Holstein-Friesian Dairy Cattle.

Mullen MP(1), Berry DP, Howard DJ, Diskin MG, Lynch CO, Giblin L, Kenny DA, Magee
DA, Meade KG, Waters SM.

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Bioscience Research Department, Animal and Grassland Research and
Innovation Centre Teagasc, Athenry, County Galway, Ireland.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) has been shown to be associated with
fertility, growth, and development in cattle. The aim of this study was to (1)
identify novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the bovine IGF-1 gene
and alongside previously identified SNPs (2) determine their association with
traits of economic importance in Holstein-Friesian dairy cattle. Nine novel SNPs 
were identified across a panel of 22 beef and dairy cattle by sequence analysis
of the 5' promoter, intronic, and 3' regulatory regions, encompassing ~5<U+2009>kb of
IGF-1. Genotyping and associations with daughter performance for milk production,
fertility, survival, and measures of body size were undertaken on 848
Holstein-Friesian AI sires. Using multiple regression analysis nominal
associations (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) were identified between six SNPs (four novel and two
previously identified) and milk composition, survival, body condition score, and 
body size. The C allele of AF017143 a previously published SNP (C-512T) in the
promoter region of IGF-1 predicted to introduce binding sites for transcription
factors HSF1 and ZNF217 was associated (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with increased cow carcass
weight (i.e., an indicator of mature cow size). Novel SNPs were identified in the
3' region of IGF-1 were associated (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with functional survival and chest 
width. The remaining four SNPs, all located within introns of IGF-1 were
associated (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with milk protein yield, milk fat yield, milk fat
concentration, somatic cell score, carcass conformation, and carcass fat. Results
of this study further demonstrate the multifaceted influences of IGF-1 on milk
production and growth related traits in cattle.

PMCID: PMC3268377
PMID: 22303302  [PubMed]


41. Cancer. 2012 Jun 1;118(11):2846-57. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26598. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Prognostic and therapeutic impact of the chromosome 20q13.2 ZNF217 locus
amplification in ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Rahman MT(1), Nakayama K, Rahman M, Nakayama N, Ishikawa M, Katagiri A, Iida K,
Nakayama S, Otsuki Y, Shih IeM, Miyazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shimane University School of
Medicine, Izumo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The goal of this study was to examine the clinical significance of
ZNF217 amplification and assess whether ZNF217 could be a potential therapeutic
target in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC).
METHODS: ZNF217 expression and amplification in OCCC was assessed by
immunohistochemistry, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and clinical data
collected via a retrospective chart review. ZNF217 gene knockdown using silencing
RNA (siRNA) was used to assess ZNF217 functions in OCCC cell lines.
RESULTS: Gene amplification was identified in 12 of 60 (20.0%) OCCCs. ZNF217 copy
number correlated significantly with ZNF217 protein expression (r = 0.341;
P<.01). ZNF217 amplification correlated significantly with shorter
progression-free (P = .0042) and overall (P = .0199) survival. There were
nonsignificant trends between high ZNF217 protein expression and poor
progression-free (P = .2594) and overall (P = .2199) survival. Multivariate
analysis revealed ZNF217 gene amplification to be an independent prognostic
factor for progression-free and overall survival after standard platinum
agent-based chemotherapy (P = .0339 and P = .031, respectively). Profound growth 
inhibition and apoptosis were observed in ZNF217 siRNA-treated cancer cells with 
gene amplification compared with cancer cells with ZNF217 moderate expression
without ZNF217 gene amplification or with low ZNF217 expression.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that ZNF217 overexpression is critical to
growth and survival of OCCCs with ZNF217 gene amplification. Furthermore, they
suggest that ZNF217 siRNA-induced phenotypes depend on amplification status of
OCCCs. Therefore, ZNF217-targeted therapy may benefit OCCC patients with ZNF217
amplification.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 22139760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Pathol. 2012 Feb;226(3):442-50. doi: 10.1002/path.2983. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

BCL2L1 has a functional role in colorectal cancer and its protein expression is
associated with chromosome 20q gain.

Sillars-Hardebol AH(1), Carvalho B, Beliën JA, de Wit M, Delis-van Diemen PM,
Tijssen M, van de Wiel MA, Pontén F, Fijneman RJ, Meijer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer death in the
western world. The majority of CRCs, which develop from adenoma precursor
lesions, show gain of chromosome arm 20q, where BCL2L1 is located. BCL2L1 is an
important apoptosis regulating gene that codes for both an anti-apoptotic
(Bcl-x(L)) and a pro-apoptotic (Bcl-x(S)) splice variant. The aim of the present 
study was to investigate whether BCL2L1 contributes to 20q gain-driven colorectal
adenoma-to-carcinoma progression. To this end, the functional role of BCL2L1 in
cancer-related processes was investigated, and differences in BCL2L1 DNA, mRNA,
and protein levels were compared between colorectal adenomas and CRCs, as well as
between tumours with and without 20q gain. Down-modulation of BCL2L1 inhibited
cell viability and anchorage-independent growth of CRC cells, while invasion was 
not affected. BCL2L1 DNA copy number and protein expression were increased in
CRCs compared to adenomas (p = 0.00005 and p = 0.03, respectively), while mRNA
expression was not. Differences in BCL2L1 protein expression were even more
pronounced between tumours with and without 20q gain (p = 0.0001). In conclusion,
BCL2L1 is functionally involved in several cancer-related processes and its
protein expression is associated with 20q gain. This supports a role for 20q
gain-dependent expression of BCL2L1 in colorectal adenoma-to-carcinoma
progression. However, the absence of a direct correlation between BCL2L1 mRNA and
protein expression implies that BCL2L1 protein expression is regulated at the
post-transcriptional level by a distinct factor on the 20q amplicon (eg ZNF217,
AURKA or miRNAs). Therefore, even though BCL2L1 affects CRC biology in a 20q
gain-dependent manner, it is not likely to be a driver of chromosome 20q gain
associated adenoma-to-carcinoma progression.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22009326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 4;286(44):38190-201. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301234. Epub
2011 Sep 11.

The multi-zinc finger protein ZNF217 contacts DNA through a two-finger domain.

Nunez N(1), Clifton MM, Funnell AP, Artuz C, Hallal S, Quinlan KG, Font J,
Vandevenne M, Setiyaputra S, Pearson RC, Mackay JP, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, New South Wales 2006,
Australia.

Classical C2H2 zinc finger proteins are among the most abundant transcription
factors found in eukaryotes, and the mechanisms through which they recognize
their target genes have been extensively investigated. In general, a tandem array
of three fingers separated by characteristic TGERP links is required for
sequence-specific DNA recognition. Nevertheless, a significant number of zinc
finger proteins do not contain a hallmark three-finger array of this type,
raising the question of whether and how they contact DNA. We have examined the
multi-finger protein ZNF217, which contains eight classical zinc fingers. ZNF217 
is implicated as an oncogene and in repressing the E-cadherin gene. We show that 
two of its zinc fingers, 6 and 7, can mediate contacts with DNA. We examine its
putative recognition site in the E-cadherin promoter and demonstrate that this is
a suboptimal site. NMR analysis and mutagenesis is used to define the DNA binding
surface of ZNF217, and we examine the specificity of the DNA binding activity
using fluorescence anisotropy titrations. Finally, sequence analysis reveals that
a variety of multi-finger proteins also contain two-finger units, and our data
support the idea that these may constitute a distinct subclass of DNA recognition
motif.

PMCID: PMC3207412
PMID: 21908891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Hum Pathol. 2012 Feb;43(2):172-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.04.018. Epub 2011
Aug 4.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of esophagectomy specimens from
patients with Barrett's esophagus with high-grade dysplasia or adenocarcinoma.

Brankley SM(1), Fritcher EG, Smyrk TC, Keeney ME, Campion MB, Voss JS, Clayton
AC, Wang KK, Lutzke LS, Kipp BR, Halling KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The progression of intestinal metaplasia to esophageal adenocarcinoma in patients
with Barrett's esophagus is partly driven by chromosomal alterations that
activate oncogenes and inactivate tumor suppressor genes. The goal of this study 
was to determine how alterations of 4 frequently affected genes correlate with
the range of histopathologic lesions observed in resected esophagi of patients
with Barrett's esophagus. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was used to assess
83 tissue sections from 10 Barrett's esophagus esophagogastrectomy specimens for 
chromosomal alterations of 8q24 (MYC), 9p21 (CDKN2A; alias P16), 17q12 (ERBB2),
and 20q13.2 (ZNF217). Histologic lesions assessed included gastric metaplasia (n 
= 8), intestinal metaplasia (n = 43), low-grade dysplasia (n = 28), high-grade
dysplasia (n = 25), and adenocarcinoma (n = 16). Histologic maps showing the
correlation between fluorescence in situ hybridization abnormalities and
corresponding histology were created for all patients. Chromosomal abnormalities 
included 9p21 loss, single locus gain, and polysomy. A greater number of
chromosomal alterations were detected as the severity of histologic diagnosis
increased from intestinal metaplasia to adenocarcinoma. All patients had
alterations involving the CDKN2A gene. CDKN2A loss was the only abnormality
detected in 20 (47%) of 43 areas of intestinal metaplasia. Polysomy, the most
common abnormality in dysplastic epithelium and adenocarcinoma, was observed in
16 (57%) of 28 low-grade dysplasia, 22 (88%) of 25 high-grade dysplasia, and 16
(100%) of 16 adenocarcinoma. The findings of this study improve our understanding
of the role that chromosomal instability and alterations of tumor suppressor
genes such as CDKN2A and oncogenes such as ERBB2 play in the progression of
intestinal metaplasia to adenocarcinoma in patients with Barrett's esophagus.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21820152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Hum Pathol. 2011 Dec;42(12):1937-45. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.02.016. Epub
2011 Jun 14.

Correlation between genomic alterations assessed by array comparative genomic
hybridization, prognostically informative histologic subtype, stage, and patient 
survival in gastric cancer.

Rossi E(1), Klersy C, Manca R, Zuffardi O, Solcia E.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

It is difficult to evaluate the prognostic value of histologic criteria in
gastric cancer because of the high variability of morphologic patterns. Recently,
histologic subtypes of low, intermediate, or high malignant potential have been
identified, providing the basis for a prognostically informative grading system. 
Because array comparative genomic hybridization systems allow systematic analysis
of chromosome alterations, which may be prognostically and pathogenetically
informative, we applied high-resolution genome-wide array comparative genomic
hybridization to archival material from 81 gastric cancer cases followed for a
median of 150 months after surgery. The DNA extracted from paraffin sections gave
useful results in 49 tumors, 18 of which were of low-grade, 24 of intermediate,
and 7 of high-grade histotypes. Based on the number of chromosome aberrations and
the presence/absence of amplifications, 3 tumor clusters of increasing genomic
lesion severity were constructed, which proved to correlate significantly with
histologic grade and stage as well as with patient survival. Further
investigation documented the lower number and severity of genomic alterations in 
tumors with microsatellite DNA instability and high CD8-rich lymphoid response;
the close association of 8p23.1 amplification with cardial cancer; the frequent
amplification of genes involved in cell renewal (CDC6, HER2, GRB7, IGFBP4) at
17q12-q21.1, with close histochemical correlation with HER2 membranous
expression; and more sporadic amplification of chromosome regions harboring
important oncogenes like MYC, KRAS, NRAS, CRKL, CCNE1, or ZNF217. We conclude
that genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization of gastric cancer
contributes prognostically relevant information providing a genetic background
for histologic grading.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21676433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Aug;34(4):337-42. doi: 10.1007/s13402-011-0032-x. Epub
2011 Jun 9.

Automated analysis of protein expression and gene amplification within the same
cells of paraffin-embedded tumour tissue.

Gaiser T(1), Berroa-Garcia L, Kemmerling R, Dutta A, Ried T, Heselmeyer-Haddad K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: The simultaneous detection of protein expression and gene copy number
changes in patient samples, like paraffin-embedded tissue sections, is
challenging since the procedures of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Fluorescence
in situ Hybridization (FISH) negatively influence each other which often results 
in suboptimal staining. Therefore, we developed a novel automated algorithm based
on relocation which allows subsequent detection of protein content and gene copy 
number changes within the same cell.
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded tissue sections of colorectal cancers were stained for
CD133 expression. IHC images were acquired and image coordinates recorded. Slides
were subsequently hybridized with fluorescently labeled DNA probes. FISH images
were taken at the previously recorded positions allowing for direct comparison of
protein expression and gene copy number signals within the same cells/tissue
areas. Relocation, acquisition of the IHC and FISH images, and enumeration of
FISH signals in the immunophenotyped tumour areas were done in an automated
fashion.
RESULTS: Automated FISH analysis was performed on 13 different colon cancer
samples that had been stained for CD133; each sample was scored for MYC, ZNF217
and Chromosome 6 in CD133 positive and negative glands. From the 13 cases four
(31%) showed amplification for the MYC oncogene and seven of 13 (54%) cases were 
amplified for ZNF217. There was no significant difference between CD133 positive 
tumour and CD133 negative tumour cells.
CONCLUSION: The technique and algorithm presented here enables an easy and
reproducible combination of IHC and FISH based on a novel automated algorithm
using relocation and automated spot counting.

PMID: 21656271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Dec;130(3):905-16. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1600-5. 
Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 20q13 amplicon genes in relation to breast
cancer risk and clinical outcome.

Shi H(1), Bevier M, Johansson R, Grzybowska E, Chen B, Eyfjörd JE, Hamann U,
Manjer J, Enquist K, Henriksson R, Carlson J, Brandt A, Lascorz J, Butkiewicz D, 
Pamula-Pilat J, Tecza K, Herms S, Hoffmann P, Hemminki K, Lenner P, Försti A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The 20q13 region is frequently amplified/overexpressed in breast tumours.
However, the nature of this amplification/overexpression is unknown. Here, we
investigated genetic variation in five 20q13 amplicon genes (MYBL2, AURKA,
ZNF217, STK4 and PTPN1) and its impact on breast cancer (BC) susceptibility and
clinical outcome. As a novel finding, four polymorphisms in STK4 (rs6017452,
rs7271519) and AURKA (rs2273535, rs8173) associated with steroid hormone receptor
status both in a Swedish population-based cohort of 783 BC cases and in a Polish 
familial/early onset cohort of 506 BC cases. In the joint analysis, the minor
allele carriers of rs6017452 had more often hormone receptor positive tumours (OR
0.57, 95% CI 0.40-0.81), while homozygotes for the minor allele of rs7271519,
rs2273535 and rs8173 had more often hormone receptor negative tumours (2.26,
1.30-3.39; 2.39, 1.14-5.01; 2.39, 1.19-4.80, respectively) than homozygotes for
the common allele. BC-specific survival analysis of AURKA suggested that the
Swedish carriers of the minor allele of rs16979877, rs2273535 and rs8173 might
have a worse survival compared with the major homozygotes. The survival
probabilities associated with the AURKA genotypes depended on the tumour
phenotype. In the Swedish case-control study, associations with BC susceptibility
were observed in a dominant model for three MYBL2 promoter polymorphisms
(rs619289, P = 0.02; rs826943, P = 0.03 and rs826944, P = 0.02), two AURKA
promoter polymorphisms (rs6064389, P = 0.04 and rs16979877, P = 0.02) and one
3'UTR polymorphism in ZNF217 (rs1056948, P = 0.01). In conclusion, our data
confirmed the impact of the previously identified susceptibility locus and
provided preliminary evidence for novel susceptibility variants in BC. We
provided evidence for the first time that genetic variants at 20q13 may affect
hormone receptor status in breast tumours and influence tumour aggressiveness and
survival of the patients. Future studies are needed to confirm the prognostic
value of our findings in the clinic.

PMID: 21630024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Lab Invest. 2011 Jul;91(7):1068-78. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.56. Epub 2011 Apr
11.

Overexpression of ZNF217 in glioblastoma contributes to the maintenance of glioma
stem cells regulated by hypoxia-inducible factors.

Mao XG(1), Yan M, Xue XY, Zhang X, Ren HG, Guo G, Wang P, Zhang W, Huo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive and common kind of primary
brain tumor in adults, and is thought to be driven by a subpopulation of glioma
stem cells (GSCs). GSCs reside in a specialized hypoxic niche, which can regulate
the tumorigenic capacity of GSCs primarily through the hypoxia-inducible factors 
(HIFs), HIF1a and HIF2a. ZNF217 is an oncogene frequently amplified in many kinds
of tumors. It is associated with aggressive tumor behavior and poor clinical
prognosis, but its role in gliomas is poorly known. Gene expression and copy
number analysis from TCGA data reveal that ZNF217 is amplified in 32% and
overexpressed in 71.2% of GBMs. Quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting of a
cohort of glioma samples showed that ZNF217 was highly expressed in gliomas and
increased with tumor grade. Analysis of a molecular database demonstrated that
ZNF217 expression correlated with poor survival of glioma patients. Investigation
of ZNF217 expression in GSCs, non-GSCs and normal neural stem cells (NSCs)
indicated that ZNF217 was more highly expressed in GSCs than in non-GSCs and
NSCs. Knockdown of ZNF217 in GSCs by small-interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited
their growth and promoted their differentiation. Interestingly, ZNF217 was
upregulated in GSCs and the GBM cell line U87 when exposed to the hypoxic
environment of 1% oxygen. Knockdown of either HIF1a or HIF2a, which has a central
role in the hypoxia-induced responses of these cells, inhibited ZNF217
expression. In addition, ZNF217 upregulation was compromised under hypoxia in U87
and GSCs when either HIF1a or HIF2a was targeted by siRNA. HIF2a knockdown
inhibited ZNF217 expression more efficiently in both normoxia and hypoxia than
HIF1a knockdown. Therefore, ZNF217 is overexpressed in GBMs and contributes to
the maintenance of GSCs, which is regulated by HIFs released by the hypoxic
environment of the tumor.

PMID: 21483406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. BMC Genomics. 2010 Dec 14;11:701. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-701.

DNA methylation in glioblastoma: impact on gene expression and clinical outcome.

Etcheverry A(1), Aubry M, de Tayrac M, Vauleon E, Boniface R, Guenot F, Saikali
S, Hamlat A, Riffaud L, Menei P, Quillien V, Mosser J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS/UMR6061, Institut de Génétique et Développement, Université de Rennes 1, 
Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND: Changes in promoter DNA methylation pattern of genes involved in key 
biological pathways have been reported in glioblastoma. Genome-wide assessments
of DNA methylation levels are now required to decipher the epigenetic events
involved in the aggressive phenotype of glioblastoma, and to guide new treatment 
strategies.
RESULTS: We performed a whole-genome integrative analysis of methylation and gene
expression profiles in 40 newly diagnosed glioblastoma patients. We also screened
for associations between the level of methylation of CpG sites and overall
survival in a cohort of 50 patients uniformly treated by surgery, radiotherapy
and chemotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide (STUPP protocol). The
methylation analysis identified 616 CpG sites differentially methylated between
glioblastoma and control brain, a quarter of which was differentially expressed
in a concordant way. Thirteen of the genes with concordant CpG sites displayed an
inverse correlation between promoter methylation and expression level in
glioblastomas: B3GNT5, FABP7, ZNF217, BST2, OAS1, SLC13A5, GSTM5, ME1, UBXD3,
TSPYL5, FAAH, C7orf13, and C3orf14. Survival analysis identified six CpG sites
associated with overall survival. SOX10 promoter methylation status (two CpG
sites) stratified patients similarly to MGMT status, but with a higher Area Under
the Curve (0.78 vs. 0.71, p-value < 5e-04). The methylation status of the FNDC3B,
TBX3, DGKI, and FSD1 promoters identified patients with MGMT-methylated tumors
that did not respond to STUPP treatment (p-value < 1e-04).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first genome-wide integrative analysis of
DNA methylation and gene expression profiles obtained from the same GBM cohort.
We also present a methylome-based survival analysis for one of the largest
uniformly treated GBM cohort ever studied, for more than 27,000 CpG sites. We
have identified genes whose expression may be tightly regulated by epigenetic
mechanisms and markers that may guide treatment decisions.

PMCID: PMC3018478
PMID: 21156036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cancer. 2010 Nov 8;9:291. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-291.

ZNF217 confers resistance to the pro-apoptotic signals of paclitaxel and aberrant
expression of Aurora-A in breast cancer cells.

Thollet A(1), Vendrell JA, Payen L, Ghayad SE, Ben Larbi S, Grisard E, Collins C,
Villedieu M, Cohen PA.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: ZNF217 is a candidate oncogene located at 20q13, a chromosomal region
frequently amplified in breast cancers. The precise mechanisms involved in ZNF217
pro-survival function are currently unknown, and utmost importance is given to
deciphering the role of ZNF217 in cancer therapy response.
RESULTS: We provide evidence that stable overexpression of ZNF217 in MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells conferred resistance to paclitaxel, stimulated cell
proliferation in vitro associated with aberrant expression of several cyclins,
and increased tumor growth in mouse xenograft models. Conversely, siRNA-mediated 
silencing of ZNF217 expression in MCF7 breast cancer cells, which possess high
endogenous levels of ZNF217, led to decreased cell proliferation and increased
sensitivity to paclitaxel. The paclitaxel resistance developed by
ZNF217-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells was not mediated by the ABCB1/PgP
transporter. However, ZNF217 was able to counteract the apoptotic signals
mediated by paclitaxel as a consequence of alterations in the intrinsic apoptotic
pathway through constitutive deregulation of the balance of Bcl-2 family
proteins. Interestingly, ZNF217 expression levels were correlated with the
oncogenic kinase Aurora-A expression levels, as ZNF217 overexpression led to
increased expression of the Aurora-A protein, whereas ZNF217 silencing was
associated with low Aurora-A expression levels. We showed that a potent Aurora-A 
kinase inhibitor was able to reverse paclitaxel resistance in the
ZNF217-overexpressing cells.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, these data suggest that ZNF217 might play an important
role in breast neoplastic progression and chemoresistance, and that Aurora-A
might be involved in ZNF217-mediated effects.

PMCID: PMC2996367
PMID: 21059223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(2):105-12. doi: 10.3233/ACP-CLO-2010-0532.

Automated analysis of protein expression and gene amplification within the same
cells of paraffin-embedded tumour tissue.

Gaiser T(1), Berroa-Garcia L, Kemmerling R, Dutta A, Ried T, Heselmeyer-Haddad K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Aug;34(4):407-8.

BACKGROUND: The simultaneous detection of protein expression and gene copy number
changes in patient samples, like paraffin-embedded tissue sections, is
challenging since the procedures of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Fluorescence
in situ Hybridization (FISH) negatively influence each other which often results 
in suboptimal staining.Therefore, we developed a novel automated algorithm based 
on relocation which allows subsequent detection of protein content and gene copy 
number changes within the same cell.
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded tissue sections of colorectal cancers were stained for
CD133 expression. IHC images were acquired and image coordinates recorded. Slides
were subsequently hybridized with fluorescently labeled DNA probes. FISH images
were taken at the previously recorded positions allowing for direct comparison of
protein expression and gene copy number signals within the same cells/tissue
areas. Relocation, acquisition of the IHC and FISH images, and enumeration of
FISH signals in the immunophenotyped tumour areas were done in an automated
fashion.
RESULTS: Automated FISH analysis was performed on 13 different colon cancer
samples that had been stained for CD133; each sample was scored for MYC, ZNF217
and Chromosome 6 in CD133 positive and negative glands. From the 13 cases four
(31%) showed amplification for the MYC oncogene and seven of 13 (54%) cases were 
amplified for ZNF217. There was no significant difference between CD133 positive 
tumour and CD133 negative tumour cells.
CONCLUSION: The technique and algorithm presented here enables an easy and
reproducible combination of IHC and FISH based on a novel automated algorithm
using relocation and automated spot counting.

PMCID: PMC3244818
PMID: 20966547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncol Lett. 2010 Sep;1(5):925-930. Epub 2010 Sep 1.

Coexistence of copy number increases of ZNF217 and CYP24A1 in colorectal cancers 
in a Chinese population.

Fang Z(1), Xiong Y, Zhang C, Li J, Liu L, Li M, Zhang W, Wan J.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST Medical Center and Shenzhen 
Hospital, Peking University, Guangdong, P.R. China.

Evidence suggests that the amplification of chromosome 20q13 is common in
colorectal cancers (CRCs). Certain candidate oncogenes located in this region are
reported to be associated with tumorigenesis of the gastrointestinal tract. The
functional impact of such regions should be extensively investigated in a large
number of clinical samples. In this study, 145 CRC samples with matched adjacent 
normal tissues were collected from a Chinese population for copy number variation
(CNV) analysis. Our results showed that both the copy numbers of 25-hydroxy
vitamin D3 24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1) and zinc-finger protein 217 (ZNF217) were
amplified in a relatively high percentage of CRC samples (51.1 and 60%,
respectively). The mRNA expression levels of both CYP24A1 and ZNF217 were found
to have increased in the collected CRC samples as compared to the matched
adjacent normal tissues. ZNF217, but not CYP24A1, showed a positive correlation
between copy number increases and mRNA overexpression. These findings suggest the
potential role of CNVs of certain oncogenes in CRCs.

PMCID: PMC3436466
PMID: 22966406  [PubMed]


53. Oncogene. 2010 Oct 7;29(40):5500-10. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.289. Epub 2010 Jul 26.

ZNF217, a candidate breast cancer oncogene amplified at 20q13, regulates
expression of the ErbB3 receptor tyrosine kinase in breast cancer cells.

Krig SR(1), Miller JK, Frietze S, Beckett LA, Neve RM, Farnham PJ, Yaswen PI,
Sweeney CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Divison of Basic Sciences, 
University of California at Davis Cancer Center, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.
skrig@ucdavis.edu

Understanding the mechanisms underlying ErbB3 overexpression in breast cancer
will facilitate the rational design of therapies to disrupt ErbB2-ErbB3 oncogenic
function. Although ErbB3 overexpression is frequently observed in breast cancer, 
the factors mediating its aberrant expression are poorly understood. In
particular, the ErbB3 gene is not significantly amplified, raising the question
as to how ErbB3 overexpression is achieved. In this study we showed that the
ZNF217 transcription factor, amplified at 20q13 in ~20% of breast tumors,
regulates ErbB3 expression. Analysis of a panel of human breast cancer cell lines
(n = 50) and primary human breast tumors (n = 15) showed a strong positive
correlation between ZNF217 and ErbB3 expression. Ectopic expression of ZNF217 in 
human mammary epithelial cells induced ErbB3 expression, whereas ZNF217 silencing
in breast cancer cells resulted in decreased ErbB3 expression. Although ZNF217
has previously been linked with transcriptional repression because of its close
association with C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP)1/2 repressor complexes, our
results show that ZNF217 also activates gene expression. We showed that ZNF217
recruitment to the ErbB3 promoter is CtBP1/2-independent and that ZNF217 and
CtBP1/2 have opposite roles in regulating ErbB3 expression. In addition, we
identify ErbB3 as one of the mechanisms by which ZNF217 augments PI-3K/Akt
signaling.

PMCID: PMC4256946
PMID: 20661224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Neoplasma. 2010;57(4):325-32.

CCND1 and ZNF217 gene amplification is equally frequent in BRCA1 and BRCA2
associated and non-BRCA breast cancer.

Plevova P(1), Cerna D, Balcar A, Foretova L, Zapletalova J, Silhanova E, Curik R,
Dvorackova J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech
Republic. pavlina.plevova@volny

Breast cancer associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations differs from
non-BRCA tumors in several respects. We determined whether there was any
difference in CCND1 (11q13) and ZNF217 (20q13) gene amplification with respect to
BRCA status. Of 40 breast cancer samples examined, 15 and 9 were from BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation carriers, respectively, and 16 from patients without mutation.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed that eight tumors exhibited CCND1
amplification (20%; 3 BRCA1, 3 BRCA2, 2 non-BRCA). ZNF217 amplification was
observed in three of 38 cases (8%; 2 BRCA1, 1 non-BRCA). There was no significant
difference in CCND1 and ZNF217 amplification between BRCA1, BRCA2 and non-BRCA
tumors. CCND1 amplification was associated with decreased disease-free (P =
0.045) and overall survival (P = 0.015). BRCA1 tumors with CCND1 amplification
were estrogen receptor negative, in contrast to CCND1 amplified BRCA2 and
non-BRCA tumors, suggesting that concurrent CCND1 amplification and estrogen and 
progesterone receptor negativity may predict germline BRCA1 gene mutation. All
ZNF217 amplified tumors were of the medullary histological type (P = 0.002).
There was no statistical correlation between CCND1 and ZNF217 amplification and
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and ERBB2 expression and TNM
classification. CCND1 amplification did not correlate with EGFR expression.

PMID: 20429623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;16(7):1997-2008. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2105. 
Epub 2010 Mar 16.

DNA copy numbers profiles in affinity-purified ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Kuo KT(1), Mao TL, Chen X, Feng Y, Nakayama K, Wang Y, Glas R, Ma MJ, Kurman RJ, 
Shih IeM, Wang TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecological Pathology, Departments of Pathology,
Gynecology/Obstetrics, and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: Advanced ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC) is one of the most
aggressive ovarian malignancies, in part because it tends to be resistant to
platinum-based chemotherapy. At present, little is known about the molecular
genetic alterations in CCCs except that there are frequent activating mutations
in PIK3CA. The purpose of this study is to comprehensively define the genomic
changes in CCC based on DNA copy number alterations.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed 250K high-density single nucleotide
polymorphism array analysis in 12 affinity-purified CCCs and 10 CCC cell lines.
Discrete regions of amplification and deletion were also analyzed in additional
21 affinity-purified CCCs using quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The level of chromosomal instability in CCC as defined by the extent of 
DNA copy number changes is similar to those previously reported in low-grade
ovarian serous carcinoma but much less than those in high-grade serous carcinoma.
The most remarkable region with DNA copy number gain is at chr20, which harbors a
potential oncogene, ZNF217. This discrete amplicon is observed in 36% of CCCs but
rarely detected in serous carcinomas regardless of grade. In addition, homozygous
deletions are detected at the CDKN2A/2B and LZTS1 loci. Interestingly, the DNA
copy number changes observed in fresh CCC tissues are rarely detected in the
established CCC cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first high resolution, genome-wide view of
DNA copy number alterations in ovarian CCC. The findings provide a genomic
landscape for future studies aimed at elucidating the pathogenesis and developing
new target-based therapies for CCCs.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2848895
PMID: 20233889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2010 Feb;30(2):391-3.

[Construction and expression of the eukaryotic green fluorescent protein
expression vector pEGFP-N1-ZNF217].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou J, Zhong M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. lijing7405@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To construct the eukaryotic green fluorescent protein expression
vector pEGFP-N1-ZNF217 and express the vector in eukaryotic cells.
METHODS: ZNF217 gene fragment was amplified by reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), and after analysis of the product by electrophoresis and
sequencing, the fragment was inserted into pEGFP-N1 fluorescent expression
vector. The constructed expression vector was then transfected into eukaryotic
cells for its expression.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Restriction endonuclease digestion and sequence analysis 
confirmed correct construction of the recombinant vector pEGFP-N1 and the
expression vector pEGFP-N1-ZNF217, which can be stably expressed in eukaryotic
cells.

PMID: 20159732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Sep-Oct;2(5):851-5. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000183.

Microarray analysis of gene expression in the ovarian cancer cell line HO-8910
with silencing of the ZNF217 gene.

Sun G(1), Qin J, Qiu Y, Gao Y, Yu Y, Deng Q, Zhong M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangdong, P.R. China.

Zinc-finger protein 217 (ZNF217), which is overexpressed during cancer
progression, can promote tumor cell immortalization. To examine the function of
ZNF217, a global expression profile was carried out using Affymetrix Gene Chip
analysis with HG-U133 plus 2.0 arrays in the ovarian cancer cell line HO-8910
after silencing of the ZNF217 gene. The results were analyzed using the Gene
Ontology program to investigate the functional network affected by ZNF217 in
ovarian cancer cells. Changes in the mRNA expression of the affected genes were
confirmed by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
The results showed that the ZNF217 gene is a key regulator of ovarian cancer, as 
the silencing of ZNF217 resulted in significant down-regulation by at least
8-fold of 164 genes in the HO-8910 cell line compared to non-silenced control
cells. Among these down-regulated genes were ALOX15, CD1D, FXYD3, GAS6, KRT4,
LIN7B, MMP-24, PDZK1, PEX6, PRSS8, SLC2A9, STRN and WFDC2. Down-regulation was
confirmed by real-time RT-PCR after the silencing of ZNF217 (p<0.05). The results
suggest that ZNF217 plays a central role in malignant processes in ovarian
cancer.

PMID: 21475912  [PubMed]


58. Virchows Arch. 2009 Sep;455(3):213-23. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0814-y. Epub 2009 
Aug 21.

High resolution analysis of DNA copy-number aberrations of chromosomes 8, 13, and
20 in gastric cancers.

Buffart TE(1), van Grieken NC, Tijssen M, Coffa J, Ylstra B, Grabsch HI, van de
Velde CJ, Carvalho B, Meijer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, PO Box 7057, 1007,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

DNA copy-number gains of chromosomes 8q, 13q, and 20q are frequently observed in 
gastric cancers. Moreover gain of chromosome 20q has been associated with lymph
node metastasis. The aim of this study was to correlate DNA copy-number changes
of individual genes on chromosomes 8q, 13q, and 20q in gastric adenocarcinomas to
clinicopathological data. DNA isolated from 63 formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded gastric adenocarcinoma tissue samples was analyzed by
whole-genome microarray comparative genomic hybridization and by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA), targeting 58 individual genes on
chromosomes 8, 13, and 20. Using array comparative genomic hybridization, gains
on 8q, 13q, and 20q were observed in 49 (77.8%), 25 (39.7%), and 49 (77.8%)
gastric adenocarcinomas, respectively. Gain of chromosome 20q was significantly
correlated with lymph node metastases (p = 0.05) and histological type (p =
0.02). MLPA revealed several genes to be frequently gained in DNA copy number.
The oncogene c-myc on 8q was gained in 73% of the cancers, while FOXO1A and ATP7B
on 13q were both gained in 28.6% of the cases. Multiple genes on chromosome 20q
showed gains in more than 60% of the cancers. DNA copy-number gains of TNFRSF6B
(20q13.3) and ZNF217 (20q13.2) were significantly associated with lymph node
metastasis (p = 0.02) and histological type (p = 0.02), respectively. In summary,
gains of chromosomes 8q, 13q, and 20q in gastric adenocarcinomas harbor DNA
copy-number gains of known and putative oncogenes. ZNF217 and TNFRSF6B are
associated with important clinicopathological variables, including lymph node
status.

PMCID: PMC2744787
PMID: 19697059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Onkologie. 2009 Jul;32(7):405-10. doi: 10.1159/000219368. Epub 2009 Jun 20.

Coexistence of copy number increases of c-Myc, ZNF217, CCND1, ErbB1 and ErbB2 in 
ovarian cancers.

Dimova I(1), Raicheva S, Dimitrov R, Doganov N, Toncheva D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Sofia, Bulgaria.
idimova73@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: We selected 5 oncogenes with well-established roles in carcinogenesis
-- CCND1, ErbB1, ErbB2, c-myc and ZNF217 -- to investigate the coexistence of
their copy imbalances in relation to the clinico-pathological characteristics of 
ovarian tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fluorescence in situ hybridization for the 5 genes was
applied to a preexisting tissue microarray. 38 ovarian tumors were successfully
analyzed for copy number changes of the 5 genes.
RESULTS: At least one of these oncogenes was gained/amplified in 27 out of 38
tumors (71.1%). We report the highest frequency of c-myc genetic
gain/amplification since it affected 42.1% of the ovarian tumors. We observed
sequential involvement of copy number alterations of the other genes in the
presence of c-myc disruption. The incidence of copy number changes of the 5
oncogenes -- both single and combinatorial -- was higher in high-grade tumors.
All double aberrations in the serous group comprised c-myc and ZNF217copy number 
increases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed a combination between copy number increases of 
c-myc and ZNF217, associated with serous histology. The data from this combined
analysis of the 5 oncogenes could be used as a basis in considering the combined 
approach in molecular-based therapy of ovarian cancer.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19556818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Histol Histopathol. 2009 Jul;24(7):821-9.

Analysis of gene status in cervical dysplastic lesions and squamous cell
carcinoma using tissue microarrays.

Costa C(1), Espinet B, Molina MA, Salgado R, Salido M, Baró T, Fusté P, Mancebo
G, Carreras R, Solé F, Serrano S, Alameda F.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Cytogenetic and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Citology
Section, Mar Hospital, IMAS, Barcelona, Spain. 93710@imas.imim.es

Cervical displasia are classified as CIN-I, CIN-II and CIN-III. It has been
observed that in at least 60% of CIN-I and CIN-II, the pathology disappears
spontaneously, while around 30% persist at 24 months, 10% progress to CIN-III and
1% develops as a SCC. The factors involved in the evolution of the pathology are 
not defined, although infection of HPV is a necessary condition, but not the only
one. For this reason, the identification of genetic changes is an essential
element for understanding the carcinogenic process. It can also serve as a
helpful tool for identifying patients who may be susceptible to its evolution and
treatment, from patients whose lesions could regress spontaneous and for whom
periodic follow-ups would be enough. Fifty three cervical biopsies from patients 
with dysplasia and ISCC were included in the study. These biopsies were set into 
nine macroarrays. Eight genes and five proteins were examined in each samples
(hTERT, PIK3CA, hTERC, MYC, CCND1, BCL2, ZNF217 and p16) by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) and/or immunohistochemistry (IHC). The results reflected
that the genetic alterations of PIK3CA, ZNF217 and CCND1 were associated with the
evolution of normal tissue to CIN I, those of hTERC and ERBB with the evolution
of LSIL to HSIL, those of hTERT and MYC with the evolution of CIN-II/CIN-III to
ISCC, and those of BCL-2 with the inception of ISCC. With regards to proteins,
the expression of MYC and CCND1 in the initial stages of the illness would help
in the acquisition of the altered cellular phenotype.

PMID: 19475528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Apr;29(4):685-8.

[Expression of ZNF217 in human ovarian cystadenocarcinoma and its clinical
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun GQ(1), Zhong M, Ding YQ, Su GD, Song TR, Yin AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology; Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. guiqinsun@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the correlation of ZNF217 expression to the carcinogenesis 
and progression of human ovarian cancer.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry and real-time RT-PCR were used to detect ZNF217
expression in human ovarian cystadenocarcinoma, ovarian cystadenoma and normal
ovary tissues.
RESULTS: The expression levels of ZNF217 protein and mRNA in ovarian
cystadenocarcinoma was significantly higher than those in matched ovarian
cystadenoma and normal tissues (P<0.05). No significant difference was found in
the expression between ovarian cystadenoma and normal ovarian tissues (P>0.05).
The mRNA expression in the specimens was consistent with the protein expression
of ZNF217 (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: ZNF217 gene expression is closely correlated to the occurrence and
clinical stages of ovarian carcinomas, suggesting that ZNF217 can be an important
candidate gene responsible for the occurrence and progression of ovarian
carcinomas.

PMID: 19403395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Epigenetics. 2009 Feb 16;4(2):100-6. Epub 2009 Feb 23.

The ZNF217 oncogene is a candidate organizer of repressive histone modifiers.

Banck MS(1), Li S, Nishio H, Wang C, Beutler AS, Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology), Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10029, USA. banck.michaela@mayo.edu

The zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) is an important oncogene based on the high
frequency of amplification and overexpression in many cancer types, but its
molecular mode of gene regulation is poorly understood. We purified a complex of 
nuclear ZNF217-binding proteins by affinity chromatography and identified its
components by mass spectrometry as Jarid1b/Plu-1, G9a, LSD1, CoREST and CtBP1.
Individual binding of these with ZNF217 was confirmed by co-immunoprecipiation
(IP). Known activities of these proteins suggested a role of the ZNF217 complex
in histone modification. Using in vitro assays the following activities were
demonstrated: Histone H3 lysine 4 trimethyl (H3K4me3) demethylase activity, which
co-fractionated with Jarid1b/Plu-1 in anion-exchange chromatography; H3K9
methylation, the known principal activity of G9a; and H3K27 methylation. The
latter suggested EZH2 as another ZNF217 binding candidate, which could be
confirmed by co-IP. Taken together, these findings suggest that ZNF217 assembles 
a distinct set of histone modifying proteins at target DNA sites that act
synergistically in transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC2929765
PMID: 19242095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Gynecol Oncol. 2009 Jan;112(1):248-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2008.09.045. Epub
2008 Nov 13.

Proteomic identification of differentially-expressed proteins in squamous
cervical cancer.

Zhu X(1), Lv J, Yu L, Zhu X, Wu J, Zou S, Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou, China. zjwzzxq@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To identify candidate biomarkers for squamous cervical cancer as well 
as reveal the molecular mechanism underlying this disease by a proteomic
approach.
METHODS: Proteins from 10 pairs of human squamous cervical cancer and matching
adjacent normal cervical tissues were separated by two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis and the differentially expressed proteins were identified by
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
Then, some of the interesting proteins obtained were confirmed by Western
blotting in the other 20 pairs of tissues.
RESULTS: A comparison of protein patterns revealed 55 protein spots significantly
changed, of which 24 protein spots with concordantly increased and 31 protein
spots with concordantly decreased intensity in squamous cervical cancer compared 
with adjacent normal cervical tissues. Thirty-two of these proteins were
identified by mass spectrometry. The overexpression of the Tyk2, S100A9, and Zinc
finger protein 217 in squamous cervical cancer was confirmed by immunoblotting.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggested that a proteomics-based approach is useful for
developing a more complete picture of the protein profile of squamous cervical
cancer. Further ongoing analysis of these differential proteins will determine
their potential applicability to squamous cervical cancer-specific diagnosis and 
therapeutics.

PMID: 19007971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Cancer. 2008 Oct 15;123(8):1761-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23708.

The eukaryotic translation elongation factor eEF1A2 induces neoplastic properties
and mediates tumorigenic effects of ZNF217 in precursor cells of human ovarian
carcinomas.

Sun Y(1), Wong N, Guan Y, Salamanca CM, Cheng JC, Lee JM, Gray JW, Auersperg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Ovarian epithelial carcinomas (OECs) frequently exhibit amplifications at the
20q13 locus which is the site of several oncogenes, including the eukaryotic
elongation factor EEF1A2 and the transcription factor ZNF217. We reported
previously that overexpressed ZNF217 induces neoplastic characteristics in
precursor cells of OEC. Unexpectedly, ZNF217, which is a transcriptional
repressor, enhanced expression of eEF1A2. In our study, array comparative genomic
hybridization, single nucleotide polymorphism and Affymetrix analysis of
ZNF217-overexpressing cell lines confirmed consistently increased expression of
eEF1A2 but not of other oncogenes, and revealed early changes in EEF1A2 gene copy
numbers and increased expression at crisis during immortalization. We defined the
influence of eEF1A2 overexpression on immortalized ovarian surface epithelial
cells, and investigated interrelationships between effects of ZNF217 and eEF1A2
on cellular phenotypes. Lentivirally induced eEF1A2 overexpression caused delayed
crisis, apoptosis resistance and increases in serum-independence, saturation
densities and anchorage independence. siRNA to eEF1A2 reversed apoptosis
resistance and reduced anchorage independence in eEF1A2-overexpressing lines.
Remarkably, siRNA to eEF1A2 was equally efficient in inhibiting both anchorage
independence and resistance to apoptosis conferred by ZNF217 overexpression. Our 
data define neoplastic properties that are caused by eEF1A2 in nontumorigenic
ovarian cancer precursor cells, and suggest that eEF1A2 plays a role in mediating
ZNF217-induced neoplastic progression.

PMCID: PMC2606039
PMID: 18661515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 16;3(7):e2656. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002656.

Epigenotyping in peripheral blood cell DNA and breast cancer risk: a proof of
principle study.

Widschwendter M(1), Apostolidou S, Raum E, Rothenbacher D, Fiegl H, Menon U,
Stegmaier C, Jacobs IJ, Brenner H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecological Oncology, UCL Institute for Women's Health,
University College London, London, United Kingdom. M.Widschwendter@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic changes are emerging as one of the most important events
in carcinogenesis. Two alterations in the pattern of DNA methylation in breast
cancer (BC) have been previously reported; active estrogen receptor-alpha
(ER-alpha) is associated with decreased methylation of ER-alpha target (ERT)
genes, and polycomb group target (PCGT) genes are more likely than other genes to
have promoter DNA hypermethylation in cancer. However, whether DNA methylation in
normal unrelated cells is associated with BC risk and whether these imprints can 
be related to factors which can be modified by the environment, is unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using quantitative methylation analysis in a
case-control study (n = 1,083) we found that DNA methylation of peripheral blood 
cell DNA provides good prediction of BC risk. We also report that invasive ductal
and invasive lobular BC is characterized by two different sets of genes, the
latter particular by genes involved in the differentiation of the mesenchyme
(PITX2, TITF1, GDNF and MYOD1). Finally we demonstrate that only ERT genes
predict ER positive BC; lack of peripheral blood cell DNA methylation of ZNF217
predicted BC independent of age and family history (odds ratio 1.49; 95%
confidence interval 1.12-1.97; P = 0.006) and was associated with ER-alpha
bioactivity in the corresponding serum.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: This first large-scale epigenotyping study demonstrates 
that DNA methylation may serve as a link between the environment and the genome. 
Factors that can be modulated by the environment (like estrogens) leave an
imprint in the DNA of cells that are unrelated to the target organ and indicate
the predisposition to develop a cancer. Further research will need to demonstrate
whether DNA methylation profiles will be able to serve as a new tool to predict
the risk of developing chronic diseases with sufficient accuracy to guide
preventive measures.

PMCID: PMC2442168
PMID: 18628976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(19):6066-77. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00246-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
14.

Genome analysis identifies the p15ink4b tumor suppressor as a direct target of
the ZNF217/CoREST complex.

Thillainadesan G(1), Isovic M, Loney E, Andrews J, Tini M, Torchia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, London Regional Cancer Program and The Lawson Health
Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

The ZNF217 oncoprotein is a constituent of a core transcriptional complex that
includes CoREST, histone deacetylase 1/2, lysine demethylase 1, and the
C-terminal binding protein 1/2. We have combined genome-wide expression profiling
and chromatin immunoprecipitation with directed selection and ligation (ChIP-DSL)
to identify a subset of genes directly regulated by ZNF217. Our results establish
p15(ink4b) as a direct target of the ZNF217 complex. Downregulation of ZNF217 in 
MCF-7 breast cancer cells resulted in a dramatic increase in p15(ink4b)
expression and coincided with increases in dimethylation of H3-K4 and,
surprisingly, a decrease in K9/K14-H3 acetylation. Stimulation of HaCaT cells
with transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) resulted in a release of ZNF217
and a concomitant binding of SMAD2 to the proximal promoter, which preceded
increases in ink4b protein expression. Furthermore, the changes in chromatin
marks at the p15(ink4b) promoter following TGF-beta stimulation were similar to
those observed following ZNF217 downregulation. Collectively, these results
establish the ZNF217 complex as a novel negative regulator of the p15(ink4b) gene
and may constitute an important link between amplification of ZNF217 and the loss
of TGF-beta responsiveness in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2547005
PMID: 18625718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Oct;47(10):873-83. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20592.

Comprehensive analysis of 20q13 genes in ovarian cancer identifies ADRM1 as
amplification target.

Fejzo MS(1), Dering J, Ginther C, Anderson L, Ramos L, Walsh C, Karlan B, Slamon 
DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. mfejzo@mednet.ucla.edu

Approximately 25,000 ovarian cancers are diagnosed in the US annually, and 75% of
cases are in the advanced stage when they are largely incurable. There is a
critical need for improved early detection tools and development of novel
treatments. Because chromosome band 20q13 is a commonly DNA amplified region in
ovarian cancer and increase in 20q13 copy number may be an early event, we
examined the DNA amplification and RNA expression pattern of 239 microarray
probes mapping to this region with the goal of identifying gene(s) associated
with ovarian cancer. Using Agilent expression microarray analysis and FISH to
tumor tissue arrays, we narrowed the candidates to 19 genes that were
consistently overexpressed in a subset of tumors amplified for both ZNF217 and
TPD54, although, interestingly the candidates do not include these two amplified 
genes. Unsupervised clustering of 225 ovarian samples with respect to RNA
expression of these 19 genes allowed identification of a 20q-amplified subset of 
51 (23%) tumors and this subset was significantly correlated with poor outcome.
Of the 19 candidate genes in this subset, ADRM1 overexpression was the most
highly correlated with amplification, was amplified in a higher percentage of
tumors than ZNF217 and TPD54, and was significantly upregulated with respect to
stage, recurrence and metastasis. In addition, overexpression of ADRM1 correlates
significantly with shorter time to recurrence and overall survival. Functional
analysis is now warranted to determine whether ADRM1 is a target for early
screening and/or therapy for ovarian cancer.

PMID: 18615678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8476-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00248-08. Epub 2008 Jun 4.

Identification of a second CtBP binding site in adenovirus type 5 E1A conserved
region 3.

Bruton RK(1), Pelka P, Mapp KL, Fonseca GJ, Torchia J, Turnell AS, Mymryk JS,
Grand RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Institute of Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) binds to adenovirus early region 1A (AdE1A)
through a highly conserved PXDLS motif close to the C terminus. We now have
demonstrated that CtBP1 also interacts directly with the transcriptional
activation domain (conserved region 3 [CR3]) of adenovirus type 5 E1A (Ad5E1A)
and requires the integrity of the entire CR3 region for optimal binding. The
interaction appears to be at least partially mediated through a sequence
((161)RRNTGDP(167)) very similar to a recently characterized novel CtBP binding
motif in ZNF217 as well as other regions of CR3. Using reporter assays, we
further demonstrated that CtBP1 represses Ad5E1A CR3-dependent transcriptional
activation. Ad5E1A also appears to be recruited to the E-cadherin promoter
through its interaction with CtBP. Significantly, Ad5E1A, CtBP1, and ZNF217 form 
a stable complex which requires CR3 and the PLDLS motif. It has been shown that
Ad513SE1A, containing the CR3 region, is able to overcome the transcriptional
repressor activity of a ZNF217 polypeptide fragment in a GAL4 reporter assay
through recruitment of CtBP1. These results suggest a hitherto-unsuspected
complexity in the association of Ad5E1A with CtBP, with the interaction resulting
in transcriptional activation by recruitment of CR3-bound factors to
CtBP1-containing complexes.

PMCID: PMC2519622
PMID: 18524818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 1;68(11):4163-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6710.

Genome-wide copy number analysis in esophageal adenocarcinoma using high-density 
single-nucleotide polymorphism arrays.

Nancarrow DJ(1), Handoko HY, Smithers BM, Gotley DC, Drew PA, Watson DI, Clouston
AD, Hayward NK, Whiteman DC.

Author information: 
(1)Oncogenomics, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Herston, Queensland,
Australia. derek.nancarrow@qimr.edu.au

We applied whole-genome single-nucleotide polymorphism arrays to define a
comprehensive genetic profile of 23 esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) primary tumor
biopsies based on loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and DNA copy number changes.
Alterations were common, averaging 97 (range, 23-208) per tumor. LOH and gains
averaged 33 (range, 3-83) and 31 (range, 11-73) per tumor, respectively. Copy
neutral LOH events averaged 27 (range, 7-57) per EAC. We noted 126 homozygous
deletions (HD) across the EAC panel (range, 0-11 in individual tumors). Frequent 
HDs within FHIT (17 of 23), WWOX (8 of 23), and DMD (6 of 23) suggest a role for 
common fragile sites or genomic instability in EAC etiology. HDs were also noted 
for known tumor suppressor genes (TSG), including CDKN2A, CDKN2B, SMAD4, and
GALR1, and identified PDE4D and MGC48628 as potentially novel TSGs. All tumors
showed LOH for most of chromosome 17p, suggesting that TSGs other than TP53 may
be targeted. Frequent gains were noted around MYC (13 of 23), BCL9 (12 of 23),
CTAGE1 (14 of 23), and ZNF217 (12 of 23). Thus, we have confirmed previous
reports indicating frequent changes to FHIT, CDKN2A, TP53, and MYC in EAC and
identified additional genes of interest. Meta-analysis of previous genome-wide
EAC studies together with the data presented here highlighted consistent regions 
of gain on 8q, 18q, and 20q and multiple LOH regions on 4q, 5q, 17p, and 18q,
suggesting that more than one gene may be targeted on each of these chromosome
arms. The focal gains and deletions documented here are a step toward identifying
the key genes involved in EAC development.

PMID: 18519675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Oncol. 2008 May;32(5):1065-71.

Silencing of ZNF217 gene influences the biological behavior of a human ovarian
cancer cell line.

Sun G(1), Zhou J, Yin A, Ding Y, Zhong M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong Province, P.R. China.

Zinc-finger protein 217 (ZNF217), a candidate oncogene on 20q13.2, can lead
cultured human ovarian and mammary epithelial cells to immortalization, which
indicates selective expression of ZNF217 affecting 20q13 amplification during
critical early stages of cancer progression. In this study, we tested the
hypothesis that ZNF217 is a key factor in regulating ovarian cancer proliferation
and progression. We examined the effect of the inhibition of ZNF217 expression on
proliferation and invasion by establishing the ZNF217 knockdown ovarian cancer
cell line using RNA interference (RNAi). Our results showed that silencing of
ZNF217 resulted in the effective inhibition of ovarian cancer cell growth and
invasive ability. The results suggested that ZNF217 might play a crucial role in 
the proliferation and invasion of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 18425333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Virchows Arch. 2008 Mar;452(3):259-68. doi: 10.1007/s00428-007-0557-6.

Molecular genetic aberrations of ovarian and uterine carcinosarcomas--a CGH and
FISH study.

Schipf A(1), Mayr D, Kirchner T, Diebold J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, KSL Luzern, 6000 Luzern 16, Switzerland.
alexander.schipf@ksl.ch

The origin of carcinosarcomas of the ovary and uterus has long been discussed. In
this study, we used a molecular-genetic approach to elucidate the tumorigenesis
of carcinosarcomas of these organs correlating our findings with the specific
biphasic pattern of these tumors. We analyzed a series of 30 paraffin-embedded
carcinosarcomas of the ovary and the uterus using comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) and fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH). In general,
gains (85%) were observed more frequently, than losses (30%). Characteristic and 
frequent chromosomal amplification was observed on chromosome 8q and 20q (42 and 
70%). FISH revealed c-myc (8q24.12) and ZNF217 (20q13.2) amplification in 78 and 
87%. Amplification of ZNF217 was mostly seen in both tumor components, whereas
amplification of c-myc was observed less often in the sarcomatous than in the
carcinomatous tumor component. Analysis of the proliferation index using Ki67
immunohistochemistry revealed a strong or moderate expression in all cases,
wherein the carcinomatous tumor component showed significantly a higher
proliferation index compared to the sarcomatous tumor areas. Although our results
are in agreement with a monoclonal origin of ovarian and uterine carcinosarcomas,
the carcinomatous component seems to be the more aggressive part of the tumor.
Furthermore, the observed patterns of genetic aberrations are highly similar to
those of serous carcinomas. This is compatible with the current opinion that
these neoplasms should be considered as metaplastic carcinomas.

PMID: 18193277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):269-81. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Role of the PLDLS-binding cleft region of CtBP1 in recruitment of core and
auxiliary components of the corepressor complex.

Kuppuswamy M(1), Vijayalingam S, Zhao LJ, Zhou Y, Subramanian T, Ryerse J,
Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
Daisy Research Center, 1100 South Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family proteins CtBP1 and CtBP2 are highly
homologous transcriptional corepressors and are recruited by a large number of
transcription factors to mediate sequence-specific transcriptional repression. In
addition to DNA-binding repressors, the nuclear protein complex of CtBP1 consists
of enzymatic constituents such as histone deacetylases (HDAC1/2), histone methyl 
transferases (HMTases; G9a and GLP), and the lysine-specific demethylase (LSD1). 
Additionally, CtBPs also recruit the components of the sumoylation machinery. The
CtBPs contain two different unique structural elements, a hydrophobic cleft, with
which factors that contain motifs related to the E1A PLDLS motif bind, and a
surface groove that binds with factors containing motifs related to the sequence 
RRTGXPPXL (RRT motif). By structure-based functional dissection of CtBP1, we show
that the PLDLS-binding cleft region functions as the primary recruitment center
for DNA-binding factors and for the core and auxiliary enzymatic constituents of 
the CtBP1 corepressor complex. We identify HDAC1/2, CoREST/LSD1, and Ubc9 (E2) as
the core constituents of the CtBP1 complex, and these components interact with
the PLDLS cleft region through non-PLDLS interactions. Among the CtBP core
constituents, HDACs contribute predominantly to the repression activity of CtBP1.
The auxiliary components include an HMTase complex (G9a/Wiz/CDYL) and two SUMO E3
ligases, HPC2 and PIAS1. The interaction of auxiliary components with CtBP1 is
excluded by PLDLS (E1A)-mediated interactions. Although monomeric CtBP1 is
proficient in the recruiting of both core and auxiliary components,
NAD(H)-dependent dimerization is required for transcriptional repression. We also
provide evidence that CtBP1 functions as a platform for sumoylation of cofactors.

PMCID: PMC2223311
PMID: 17967884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jun;1775(2):333-40. Epub 2007 May 22.

Amplification of zinc finger gene 217 (ZNF217) and cancer: when good fingers go
bad.

Quinlan KG(1), Verger A, Yaswen P, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, G08, University of Sydney, NSW 
2006, Australia.

Chromosome 20q13 is highly amplified in human cancers, including 20-30% of early 
stage human breast cancers. The amplification correlates with poor prognosis.
Over-expression of the zinc-finger protein 217 (ZNF217), a candidate oncogene on 
20q13.2, in cultured human mammary and ovarian epithelial cells can lead to their
immortalization, indicating that selection for ZNF217 expression may drive 20q13 
amplification during critical early stages of cancer progression. ZNF217 can also
attenuate apoptotic signals resulting from exposure to doxorubicin, suggesting
that ZNF217 expression may also be involved in resistance to chemotherapy. Recent
findings indicate that ZNF217 binds specific DNA sequences, recruits the
co-repressor C-terminal binding protein (CtBP), and represses the transcription
of a variety of genes. Inappropriate expression of ZNF217 may lead to aberrant
down-regulation of genes involved in limiting the proliferation, survival, and/or
invasiveness of cancer cells. Better understanding of ZNF217 and its associated
pathways may provide new targets for therapeutic intervention in human cancers.

PMID: 17572303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Int J Cancer. 2007 May 1;120(9):1863-73.

Multiple roles of the candidate oncogene ZNF217 in ovarian epithelial neoplastic 
progression.

Li P(1), Maines-Bandiera S, Kuo WL, Guan Y, Sun Y, Hills M, Huang G, Collins CC, 
Leung PC, Gray JW, Auersperg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The transcription factor ZNF217 is often amplified in ovarian cancer, but its
role in neoplastic progression is unknown. We introduced ZNF217-HA by adenoviral 
and retroviral infection into normal human ovarian surface epithelial cells
(OSE), i.e., the source of ovarian cancer, and into SV40 Tag/tag expressing,
p53/pRB-deficient OSE with extended but finite life spans (IOSE). In OSE,
ZNF217-HA reduced cell-substratum adhesion and accelerated loss of senescent
cells, but caused no obvious proneoplastic changes. In contrast, ZNF217-HA
transduction into IOSE yielded two permanent lines, I-80RZ and I-144RZ, which
exhibited telomerase activity, stable telomere lengths, anchorage independence
and reduced serum dependence, but were not tumorigenic in SCID mice. This
immortalization required short-term EGF treatment near the time of crisis. The
permanent lines were EGF-independent, but ZNF217-dependent since siRNA to ZNF217 
inhibited anchorage independence and arrested growth. Array CGH revealed genomic 
changes resembling those of ovarian carcinomas, such as amplicons at 3q and 20q, 
and deletions at 4q and 18, associated with underexpressed annexin A10,
N-cadherin, desmocollin 3 and PAI-2, which have been reported as tumor
suppressors. The lines overexpressed EEF1A2, SMARA3 and STAT1 and underexpressed 
other oncogenes, tumor suppressors and extracellular matrix/adhesion genes. The
results implicate ZNF217 as an ovarian oncogene, which is detrimental to
senescing normal OSE cells but contributes to neoplastic progression in OSE with 
inactivated p53/RB. The resemblance of the genomic changes in the
ZNF217-overexpressing lines to ovarian carcinomas provides a unique model to
investigate interrelationships between these changes and ovarian neoplastic
phenotypes.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17266044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9703-12. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Identification of genes directly regulated by the oncogene ZNF217 using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip assays.

Krig SR(1), Jin VX, Bieda MC, O'Geen H, Yaswen P, Green R, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Genome Center, University of California,
Davis, California 95616, USA.

It has been proposed that ZNF217, which is amplified at 20q13 in various tumors, 
plays a key role during neoplastic transformation. ZNF217 has been purified in
complexes that contain repressor proteins such as CtBP2, suggesting that it acts 
as a transcriptional repressor. However, the function of ZNF217 has not been well
characterized due to a lack of known target genes. Using a global chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip approach, we identified thousands of ZNF217
binding sites in three tumor cell lines (MCF7, SW480, and Ntera2). Further
analysis of ZNF217 in Ntera2 cells showed that many promoters are bound by ZNF217
and CtBP2 and that a subset of these promoters are activated upon removal of
ZNF217. Thus, our in vivo studies corroborate the in vitro biochemical analyses
of ZNF217-containing complexes and support the hypothesis that ZNF217 functions
as a transcriptional repressor. Gene ontology analysis showed that ZNF217 targets
in Ntera2 cells are involved in organ development, suggesting that one function
of ZNF217 may be to repress differentiation. Accordingly we show that
differentiation of Ntera2 cells with retinoic acid led to down-regulation of
ZNF217. Our identification of thousands of ZNF217 target genes will enable
further studies of the consequences of aberrant expression of ZNF217 during
neoplastic transformation.

PMCID: PMC2269729
PMID: 17259635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Melanoma Res. 2007 Feb;17(1):37-41.

Gene-specific fluorescence in-situ hybridization analysis on tissue microarray to
refine the region of chromosome 20q amplification in melanoma.

Koynova DK(1), Jordanova ES, Milev AD, Dijkman R, Kirov KS, Toncheva DI, Gruis
NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Several comparative genomic hybridization studies provide evidence for
overrepresentation of the long arm of chromosome 20 in malignant melanoma. These 
studies also suggest that chromosome 20q contains genes that may contribute to
melanoma pathogenesis. To refine the region of 20q amplification and to identify 
potential candidate genes involved in melanoma or even in melanoma progression
from these regions, we combined fluorescence in-situ hybridization with MYBL2,
ZNF217, CYP24 and STK6 specific probes (chromosomal region 20q13.1-q13.2) with
high-throughput tissue microarray consisting of 280 primary melanomas and
melanoma metastases. Low-level amplification ranging from 0.5 to 2.0% was
detected for the tumor-related genes of interest. Higher frequencies of gain when
compared with amplification were detected for MYBL2, ZNF217, CYP24 and STK6.
Aneusomy of centromere 20 was observed in 29.9% of the analyzed tumors. A
significantly higher frequency of ZNF217, CYP24 and STK6 total copy-number
increase, as well as aneusomy of centromere 20, was found in the group of
metastases when compared with the group of primary melanomas. Despite the
technological advantage of fluorescence in-situ hybridization on tissue
microarray, which allows refining regions of amplification, we were not able to
recognize any of the MYBL2, ZNF217, CYP24 and STK6 genes as a particular relevant
gene for melanoma tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17235240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Dec;23(6):665-7.

[ZNF217 gene was detected in ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma by fluorescence in
situ hybridization].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhong M(1), Li J, Ding YQ, Song LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510515, P. R. China. zhongmei@fimmu.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate amplification of zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) gene 
in ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma and its clinical significance.
METHODS: Twenty three specimens of ovarian carcinoma, 10 specimens of ovarian
benign tumors and 7 specimens of normal ovaries and two ovarian cancer cell
lines, SKOV3 and HO-8910 were examined by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH).
RESULTS: The amplification of ZNF217 was gained in 12 case of ovarian cancers,
there was only 1 case in ovarian benign tumor and not amplication in normal
ovary.
CONCLUSION: The amplification of ZNF217 is associated with ovarian cancer.
Oncogenes ZNF217 maybe play a role in cell differentiation and indicate poorer
survival in patients with ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17160949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Mar;85(3):293-304. Epub 2006 Dec 2.

Array CGH identifies distinct DNA copy number profiles of oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes in chromosomal- and microsatellite-unstable sporadic colorectal 
carcinomas.

Lassmann S(1), Weis R, Makowiec F, Roth J, Danciu M, Hopt U, Werner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Breisacherstr. 115a,
79110, Freiburg, Germany. silke.lassmann@uniklinik-freiburg.de

DNA copy number changes represent molecular fingerprints of solid tumors and are 
as such relevant for better understanding of tumor development and progression.
In this study, we applied genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) to identify gene-specific DNA copy number changes in chromosomal (CIN)-
and microsatellite (MIN)-unstable sporadic colorectal cancers (sCRC). Genomic DNA
was extracted from microdissected, matching normal colorectal epithelium and
invasive tumor cells of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues of 22 cases 
with colorectal cancer (CIN = 11, MIN = 11). DNA copy number changes were
determined by aCGH for 287 target sequences in tumor cell DNAs, using pooled
normal DNAs as reference. aCGH data of tumor cell DNAs was confirmed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for three genes on serial tissues as
those used for aCGH. aCGH revealed DNA copy number changes previously described
by metaphase CGH (gains 7, 8q, 13q, and 20q; losses 8p, 15q, 18q, and 17p).
However, chromosomal regions 20q, 13q, 7, and 17p were preferentially altered in 
CIN-type tumors and included DNA amplifications of eight genes on chromosome 20q 
(TOP1, AIB1, MYBL2, CAS, PTPN1, STK15, ZNF217, and CYP24), two genes on
chromosome 13q (BRCA2 and D13S25), and three genes on chromosome 7 (IL6, CYLN2,
and MET) as well as DNA deletions of two genes on chromosome 17p (HIC1 and
LLGL1). Finally, additional CIN-tumor-associated DNA amplifications were
identified for EXT1 (8q24.11) and MYC (8q24.12) as well as DNA deletions for
MAP2K5 (15q23) and LAMA3 (18q11.2). In contrast, distinct MIN-tumor-associated
DNA amplifications were detected for E2F5 (8p22-q21.3), GARP (11q13.5-q14), ATM
(11q22.3), KAL (Xp22.3), and XIST (Xq13.2) as well as DNA deletions for RAF1
(3p25), DCC (18q21.3), and KEN (21q tel). aCGH revealed distinct DNA copy number 
changes of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in CIN- and MIN-type sporadic
colorectal carcinomas. The identified candidate genes are likely to have distinct
functional roles in the carcinogenesis and progression of CIN- and MIN-type
sporadic CRCs and may be involved in the differential response of CIN- and
MIN-type tumor cells to (adjuvant) therapy, such as 5-fluorouracil.

PMID: 17143621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2007 May 17;26(23):3378-86. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Biochemical characterization of the zinc-finger protein 217 transcriptional
repressor complex: identification of a ZNF217 consensus recognition sequence.

Cowger JJ(1), Zhao Q, Isovic M, Torchia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, London Regional Cancer Program, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Zinc-finger protein 217 (ZNF217) is a Kruppel-like zinc-finger protein located at
20q13.2, within a region of recurrent maximal amplification. Here, we demonstrate
that ZNF217 is a transcriptional repressor protein and report the purification
and characterization of a ZNF217 complex. The purified ZNF217 complex consists of
approximately six proteins and contains the transcriptional co-repressors CoREST,
BHC110/LSD1, histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2 and C-terminal binding protein (CtBP1).
The purified ZNF217 complex possesses deacetylase activity as well as lysine 4
histone H3-specific demethylase activity that is most likely mediated by the
BHC110/LSD1 component. To determine if ZNF217 is a sequence-specific binding
protein, we have made use of cyclic amplification and selection of targets (CAST)
assay and identify for the first time a ZNF217 DNA consensus recognition sequence
(CRS) that is highly conserved in the human E-cadherin promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments demonstrate that ZNF217, as well as the
other components of the ZNF217 complex, are found on the region of the proximal
E-cadherin promoter that contains the identified ZNF217 CRS in vivo. Using a
combination of transient transfections and small interfering RNA, we demonstrate 
that ZNF217 represses the E-cadherin promoter. Collectively, our results
implicate ZNF217 and its associated proteins in a novel pathway that may have
profound effects on cancer progression.

PMID: 17130829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. BMC Cancer. 2006 Oct 13;6:245.

Frequency, prognostic impact, and subtype association of 8p12, 8q24, 11q13,
12p13, 17q12, and 20q13 amplifications in breast cancers.

Letessier A(1), Sircoulomb F, Ginestier C, Cervera N, Monville F, Gelsi-Boyer V, 
Esterni B, Geneix J, Finetti P, Zemmour C, Viens P, Charafe-Jauffret E,
Jacquemier J, Birnbaum D, Chaffanet M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Département d'Oncologie
Moléculaire, UMR599 Inserm/Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.
letessiera@marseille.fnclcc.fr <letessiera@marseille.fnclcc.fr>

BACKGROUND: Oncogene amplification and overexpression occur in tumor cells.
Amplification status may provide diagnostic and prognostic information and may
lead to new treatment strategies. Chromosomal regions 8p12, 8q24, 11q13, 17q12
and 20q13 are recurrently amplified in breast cancers.
METHODS: To assess the frequencies and clinical impact of amplifications, we
analyzed 547 invasive breast tumors organized in a tissue microarray (TMA) by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and calculated correlations with
histoclinical features and prognosis. BAC probes were designed for: (i) two 8p12 
subregions centered on RAB11FIP1 and FGFR1 loci, respectively; (ii) 11q13 region 
centered on CCND1; (iii) 12p13 region spanning NOL1; and (iv) three 20q13
subregions centered on MYBL2, ZNF217 and AURKA, respectively. Regions 8q24 and
17q12 were analyzed with MYC and ERBB2 commercial probes, respectively.
RESULTS: We observed amplification of 8p12 (amplified at RAB11FIP1 and/or FGFR1) 
in 22.8%, 8q24 in 6.1%, 11q13 in 19.6%, 12p13 in 4.1%, 17q12 in 9.9%, 20q13Z
(amplified at ZNF217 only) in 9.9%, and 20q13Co (co-amplification of two or three
20q13 loci) in 8.5% of cases. The 8q24, 12p13, and 17q12 amplifications were
correlated with high grade. The most frequent single amplifications were 8p12
(9.8%), 8q24 (3.3%) and 12p13 (3.3%), 20q13Z and 20q13Co (1.6%) regions. The
17q12 and 11q13 regions were never found amplified alone. The most frequent
co-amplification was 8p12/11q13. Amplifications of 8p12 and 17q12 were associated
with poor outcome. Amplification of 12p13 was associated with basal molecular
subtype.
CONCLUSION: Our results establish the frequencies, prognostic impacts and subtype
associations of various amplifications and co-amplifications in breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC1626089
PMID: 17040570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):8159-72. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Specific recognition of ZNF217 and other zinc finger proteins at a surface groove
of C-terminal binding proteins.

Quinlan KG(1), Nardini M, Verger A, Francescato P, Yaswen P, Corda D, Bolognesi
M, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia.

Numerous transcription factors recruit C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)
corepressors. We show that the large zinc finger protein ZNF217 contacts CtBP.
ZNF217 is encoded by an oncogene frequently amplified in tumors. ZNF217 contains 
a typical Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser (PXDLS) motif that binds in CtBP's PXDLS-binding
cleft. However, ZNF217 also contains a second motif, Arg-Arg-Thr (RRT), that
binds a separate surface on CtBP. The crystal structure of CtBP bound to an
RRTGAPPAL peptide shows that it contacts a surface crevice distinct from the
PXDLS binding cleft. Interestingly, both PXDLS and RRT motifs are also found in
other zinc finger proteins, such as RIZ. Finally, we show that ZNF217 represses
several promoters, including one from a known CtBP target gene, and mutations
preventing ZNF217's contact with CtBP reduce repression. These results identify a
new CtBP interaction motif and establish ZNF217 as a transcriptional repressor
protein that functions, at least in part, by associating with CtBP.

PMCID: PMC1636751
PMID: 16940172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 1;12(15):4533-44.

Prognosis and gene expression profiling of 20q13-amplified breast cancers.

Ginestier C(1), Cervera N, Finetti P, Esteyries S, Esterni B, Adélaïde J, Xerri
L, Viens P, Jacquemier J, Charafe-Jauffret E, Chaffanet M, Birnbaum D, Bertucci
F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, UMR599 Inserm, Marseilles, France.

PURPOSE: Amplification of chromosomal region 20q13 occurs in breast cancer but
remains poorly characterized.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To establish the frequency of 20q13 amplification and select
the amplified cases to be studied, we used fluorescence in situ hybridization of 
bacterial artificial chromosome probes for three 20q13 loci (MYBL2, STK6, ZNF217)
on sections of tissue microarrays containing 466 primary carcinoma samples. We
used Affymetryx whole-genome DNA microarrays to establish the gene expression
profiles of 20q13-amplified tumors and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR to 
validate the results.
RESULTS: We found 36 (8%) 20q13-amplified samples. They were distributed in two
types: type 1 tumors showed ZNF217 amplification only, whereas type 2 tumors
showed amplification at two or three loci. Examination of the histoclinical
features of the amplified tumors showed two strikingly opposite data. First, type
1 tumors were more frequently lymph node-negative tumors but were paradoxically
associated with a poor prognosis. Second, type 2 tumors were more frequently
lymph node-positive tumors but were paradoxically associated with a good
prognosis. Type 1 and type 2 showed different gene expression profiles. No 20q13 
gene could be associated with type 1 amplification, whereas several 20q13 genes
were overexpressed in type 2 tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that amplified tumors of types 1 and 2 are two
distinct entities resulting from two different mechanisms and associated to
different prognosis.

PMID: 16899599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 Jun;26(6):824-5.

[Oncogene ZNF217 amplification on chromosome 20 q in ovarian serous
cystadenocarcinoma and its clinical implications].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhong M, Song LL, Su GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. lijing7405@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the amplification of zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217)
gene on chromosome 20 in ovarian cancer and its clinical significance.
METHODS: Twenty-three specimens of ovarian carcinoma (11 cases of early stage and
12 advanced stage), 10 specimens of benign ovarian tumors and 7 normal ovaries
were examined for ZNF217 gene amplification on chromosome 20 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH).
RESULTS: ZNF217 gene amplification was detected in 12 cases of ovarian cancer
(52.17%) and 1 case of benign ovarian tumor, but not in normal ovary. ZNF217
amplification was significantly associated with ovarian cancer.
CONCLUSION: Oncogene ZNF217 is associated with the tumor stage and poor prognosis
of patients with ovarian cancer.

PMID: 16793610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Apr 15;166(2):157-62.

Genomic array and expression analysis of frequent high-level amplifications in
adenocarcinomas of the gastro-esophageal junction.

van Dekken H(1), Vissers K, Tilanus HW, Kuo WL, Tanke HJ, Rosenberg C, Ijszenga
M, Szuhai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
h.vandekken@erasmusmc.nl

Adenocarcinomas of the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) show frequent high-level
amplifications (HLA), but the underlying genes are not well defined. We have
characterized genomic gain in 14 GEJ carcinomas by array-based comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH). The most frequent gains and amplifications were
detected at 7q (57%), 8q (57%), 17q (64%), and 20q (79%), with minimally
amplified regions at 7q21.1, 8q24.2, 17q12, and 20q13.2. Five HLA were detected
on 7q, one on 8q, two on 17q, and three on 20q. HLA of 8q24 and 17q12 were
related to MYC and ERBB2, respectively. The HLA on 7q21 was associated
recurrently with ABCB1, whereas the amplified region on 20q13 implicated ZNF217, 
BCAS1, and CYP24. RNA expression analysis of 11 adenocarcinomas by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed for cancer-related 
genes residing at 7q21 (ABCB1, ABCB4, CDK6, HGF, DMTF1, SRI, TP53AP1) and 20q13
(ZNF217, BCAS1, CYP24, TNFRSF6B). The most frequently upregulated gene on 7q21
was HGF (45%), but there was no association with genomic amplification. The most 
frequently overexpressed gene at 20q13 was BCAS1 (27%), which was related to HLA 
of this region (P = 0.006) in all three cases. We conclude that HLA occur often
in GEJ adenocarcinomas. The gene responsible for the HLA of 7q21 requires further
investigation, whereas BCAS1 is a good candidate for the frequent amplification
of 20q13.

PMID: 16631473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Lett. 2007 Jan 8;245(1-2):303-14. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

High resolution analysis of genomic aberrations by metaphase and array
comparative genomic hybridization identifies candidate tumour genes in lung
cancer cell lines.

Zhu H(1), Lam DC, Han KC, Tin VP, Suen WS, Wang E, Lam WK, Cai WW, Chung LP, Wong
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.

Tumours develop from clonally expanded population of cells harbouring aberrations
of oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes. In this study, metaphase and array
comparative genomic hybridization showed good correlation of aberration profiles 
in lung adenocarcinoma cell lines from patients with different tobacco exposure. 
Recurrent DNA gains were found at chromosomes 1, 7, 8, 17, 20, and deletions at
1, 3, 8, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18, 19. Candidate tumour loci and encompassed genes at
7p21 (AGR2), 8q21(TPD52), 20q13 (ZNF217, WFDC2, EEF1A2) and 10p15 (KLF6) were
analyzed by dual colour FISH for genomic changes and quantitative PCR for
expression changes. Results indicated that EEF1A2 and KLF6 were strong candidates
of oncogene and tumour suppressor genes, respectively. This study illustrates, a 
practical strategy for identifying candidate cancer genes from microarray data.

PMID: 16517066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Nov 1;14(21):3219-25. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

ZNF217 suppresses cell death associated with chemotherapy and telomere
dysfunction.

Huang G(1), Krig S, Kowbel D, Xu H, Hyun B, Volik S, Feuerstein B, Mills GB,
Stokoe D, Yaswen P, Collins C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, The University of California San Francisco, CA
94143-0808, USA.

Chromosome 20q13.2 is amplified in 20-30% of early-stage breast tumors and is
associated with poor prognosis. Detailed mapping of the amplified region using
molecular cytogenetics, positional cloning and genomic sequencing culminated in a
detailed molecular description of the candidate oncogene ZNF217. ZNF217 proteins 
resemble Kruppel-like transcription factors, localize predominately to the
nucleus and associate with proteins involved in transcriptional repression. The
findings that ZNF217 can immortalize human mammary epithelial cells and that its 
amplification is associated with poor prognosis suggest that it may play roles in
both early- and late-stage breast cancer. We present evidence that ZNF217 can
attenuate apoptotic signals resulting from telomere dysfunction as well as from
doxorubicin-induced DNA damage and that silencing ZNF217 with siRNA restores
sensitivity to doxorubicin. Moreover, elevated ZNF217 leads to increased
phosphorylation of Akt, whereas inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase
pathway and Akt phosphorylation decreases ZNF217 protein levels and increases
sensitivity to doxorubicin. These results suggest that ZNF217 may promote
neoplastic transformation by increasing cell survival during telomeric crisis and
may promote later stages of malignancy by increasing cell survival during
chemotherapy.

PMID: 16203743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Jan;8(1):60-2.

[Study on amplification of ZNF217 in primary gastric carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu YQ(1), Zhu ZG, Liu BY, Chen XH, Zhang Y, Yin HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical University,
Shanghai 200025, China. doctorzhuyq@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate amplification of zinc finger protein 217(ZNF217) and
its association with clinicopathologic parameters in primary gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: Semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to determine
DNA copies of ZNF217 in the specimens from forty- seven cases with primary
gastric carcinoma.
RESULTS: There was no difference in DNA copies between tumor specimens and
paratumor normal tissues. The incidence of ZNF217 amplification was 11.36% in
gastric cancer. The amplification of ZNF217 was significantly associated with
tumor size(P< 0.01) and intestinal type of stomach cancer(P< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Oncogene ZNF217 may play a role in specific tumor types or subtypes
of gastric cancer. There may be other oncogenes associated with gastric carcinoma
in 20(q)13.

PMID: 16149004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Aug;161(1):63-9.

The human ovarian teratocarcinoma cell line PA-1 demonstrates a single
translocation: analysis with fluorescence in situ hybridization, spectral
karyotyping, and bacterial artificial chromosome microarray.

Sarraf S(1), Tejada R, Abawi M, Oberst M, Dennis T, Simon KC, Blancato J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University, 3800 Reservoir Road NW,
Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Cell lines derived from tumors contain numerous chromosomal aberrations and are
the focus of study in tumor evolution. The ovarian teratocarcinoma cell line PA-1
demonstrates a single chromosomal aberration: a reciprocal t(15;20)(p11.2;q11.2).
A complete molecular genetic analysis was undertaken to characterize this cell
line. The PA-1 cell line was studied with fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), spectral karyotyping (SKY), bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
microarray, and Western blotting. Amplification of 20q is frequently implicated
in both breast and ovarian cancer; this region contains a number of oncogenes
including MDM2, ZNF217, and the ovarian tumor marker WFDC2 (alias HE4). FISH
revealed gene amplification of AIB1 (now known as NCOA3) but not STK15 (now known
as AURKA). Immunoblot analysis demonstrated 3.6-fold overexpression of the AIB1
protein product, but no elevation of the STK15. BAC cancer gene microarray
analysis showed gene amplification of > or =1.20 for five oncogenes. The presence
of a consistent single change in PA-1, the t(15;20)(p11.2;q11.2), suggests that
the aberration is significant with respect to the transformation status of the
cell line. This translocation appears to cause overexpression of AIB1 (and
perhaps other proteins), which may provide an immortalizing effect on this cell
line.

PMID: 16080959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Methods Mol Biol. 2005;293:27-37.

Multiplex quantitative real-time PCR of laser microdissected tissue.

Rooney PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen, UK.

This chapter describes a method for the rapid assessment of gene copy number in
laser microdissected material using multiplex real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). Here a putative oncogene (ZNF217) was evaluated in a series of colon
tumors, but the method is applicable to any locus for which a nucleic acid
sequence is available. The preparation, laser microdissection, and optimum
storage of snap-frozen tumor material from freshly resected tissue is described. 
A set of guidelines specific for real-time PCR assays is included to assist with 
optimum primer and probe design. In this assay multiplex real-time PCR was
performed and our experience has demonstrated that a multiplex reaction allows
for a more accurate assessment of gene copy number than a "singleplex" assay
because it removes the need for an external control.

PMID: 16028408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Tumour Biol. 2005 Mar-Apr;26(2):88-93. Epub 2005 May 13.

Coexistence of copy number changes of different genes (INK4A, erbB-1, erbB-2,
CMYC, CCND1 and ZNF217) in urothelial tumors.

Toncheva D(1), Zaharieva B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
dragatoncheva@yahoo.com

The aim of this study was to establish the frequency of combinatorial and
separate copy number changes of INK4A (9p21), erbB-1 (7p11), erbB-2 (17q17-21),
CMYC (8q24), CCND1 (11q13) and ZNF217 (20q13) in urothelial tumors; a tissue
microarray of 159 urothelial bladder tumors was analyzed by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization. A total of 38 invasive tumors were successfully analyzed for all 6
loci. Normal gene copy numbers of all loci were established in 13 tumors (34.2%).
In 25 tumors (65.8%), at least one aberration was found. Single abnormalities
were detected in 16 tumors (64%), while double or higher abnormalities were found
in 9 tumors (39%). The most frequent genetic change was deletion of INK4A (60% of
aberrant tumors), followed by increased copy number changes of ZNF217 (36%),
CCND1 (28%), CMYC (12%) and erbB-1 (4%). It was significantly more frequent in
pT1 than in pT2-4 tumors and was predominantly found separately, while oncogene
copy number increases were usually combined with another aberration and were not 
associated with the tumor stage. We concluded that INK4A loss is usually found as
a single aberration in bladder cancer, which is more frequent in pT1 than in
pT2-4 tumors. Overrepresentations of putative oncogenes are present in these two 
groups with similar frequency and are rarely found as single abnormality.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15897688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Jul;43(3):165-74.

Amplification and overexpression of aurora kinase A (AURKA) in immortalized human
ovarian epithelial (HOSE) cells.

Chung CM(1), Man C, Jin Y, Jin C, Guan XY, Wang Q, Wan TS, Cheung AL, Tsao SW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Immortalization is an early and essential step of human carcinogenesis.
Amplification of chromosome 20q has been shown to be a common event in
immortalized cells and cancers. We have previously reported that gain and
amplification of chromosome 20q is a non-random and common event in immortalized 
human ovarian surface epithelial (HOSE) cells. The chromosome 20q harbors genes
including TGIF2 (20q11.2-q12), AIB1 (20q12), PTPN1 (20q13.1), ZNF217 (20q13.2),
and AURKA (20q13.2-q13.3), which were previously reported to be amplified and
overexpressed in ovarian cancers. Some of these genes may be involved in
immortalization of HOSE cells and represent crucial premalignant changes in
ovarian surface epithelium. Investigation of the involvement of these genes was
examined in four pairs of pre-crisis (preimmortalized) and post-crisis
(immortalized) HOSE cells. Overexpression of AURKA (Aurora kinase A), also known 
as BTAK and STK15, by both real time-quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(RT-QPCR) and Western blotting was detected in all the four immortalized HOSE
cells examined while overexpression of AIB1 and ZNF217 was observed in two of
four immortalized HOSE cells examined. Overexpression of TGIF2 and PTPN1 was not 
significant in our immortalized HOSE cell systems. The degree of overexpression
of AURKA was shown to be closely associated with the amplification of chromosome 
20q in immortalized HOSE cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with
labeled P1 artificial clone (PAC) confirmed the amplification of the chromosomal 
region (20q13.2-13.3) where AURKA resides. DNA amplification of AURKA was also
confirmed using semi-quantitative PCR. Our study showed that amplification and
overexpression of AURKA is a common and significant event during immortalization 
of HOSE cells and may represent an important premalignant change in ovarian
carcinogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15880741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 May;91(1):89-93.

Detection of genetic instability at HER-2/neu and p53 loci in breast cancer cells
sing Comet-FISH.

Kumaravel TS(1), Bristow RG.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, University Health
Network, Ontario, Canada.

A proportion of breast cancers acquire genetic alterations at 17q11.2-q12
(HER-2/neu), 20q13.2 (ZNF217 gene) and 17p13.1 (p53). We describe a unique
technique (Comet-FISH) in which we documented relative genetic instability at p53
and HER-2/neu gene loci within a panel of malignant breast cancer cell lines
(MCF-7; MDA-MB-468 and CRL-2336). Furthermore, Comet-FISH data were consistent
with preferential repair of the p53 locus following gentoxic insult and suggest
that this assay may be quite useful for the study of genetic instability.

PMID: 15868435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):633-41.

Detection of Her2/neu, c-MYC and ZNF217 gene amplification during breast cancer
progression using fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Shimada M(1), Imura J, Kozaki T, Fujimori T, Asakawa S, Shimizu N, Kawaguchi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology Development and Assessment, IDV, SRL Inc, 5-6-50
Shinmachi, Hino-shi, Tokyo 191-0002, Japan. komiyams@srl.srl-inc.co.jp

The deletion of tumor suppressor genes and amplification of activating oncogenes 
appear to be critical events in tumorigenesis. We carried out fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of the breast cancer cell line MCF7 and
clinically obtained cancer tissue sections on the basis of which we suggest a
breast cancer development model. We selected 28 genes for FISH probes from breast
cancer patients. Of the 28 genes studied, 14 were shown to be consistently
amplified in the breast cancer cell line MCF7. We selected three genes from
clinical tumor samples on the basis of results from MCF7 analysis. The
amplification of Her2/neu or ZNF217 is closely associated with the stages of
breast cancer. The frequency of amplification of Her2/neu increased notably in
patients at stages later than IIB based on TNM staging, whereas the amplification
of ZNF217 correlated with T2N1M0 at stage IIB and later stages. c-MYC
amplification was not related to the stage. Her2/neu, ZNF217 and c-MYC were found
to have a significantly increased copy number in breast cancer cells. In breast
cancer progression, c-MYC amplification is an early event, while ZNF217 and
Her2/neu amplification may play a role in the later stage of tumor development.

PMID: 15756435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biomed Environ Sci. 2004 Dec;17(4):432-41.

Genes differentially expressed in human lung fibroblast cells transformed by
glycidyl methacrylate.

Yin XJ(1), Xu JN, Zou CQ, He FS, Fang FD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100005, China. xyin@hsc.wvu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To define the differences in gene expression patterns between glycidyl
methacrylate (GMA)-transformed human lung fibroblast cells (2BS cells) and
controls.
METHODS: The mRNA differential display polymerase chain reaction (DD-PCR)
technique was used. cDNAs were synthesized by reverse transcription and amplified
by PCR using 30 primer combinations. After being screened by dot blot analysis,
differentially expressed cDNAs were cloned, sequenced and confirmed by Northern
blot analysis.
RESULTS: Eighteen differentially expressed cDNAs were cloned and sequenced, of
which 17 were highly homologous to known genes (homology = 89%-100%) and one was 
an unknown gene. Northern blot analysis confirmed that eight genes encoding human
zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217), mixed-lineage kinase 3 (MLK-3), ribosomal
protein (RP) L15, RPL41, RPS 16, TBX3, stanniocalcin 2 (STC2) and mouse ubiquitin
conjugating enzyme (UBC), respectively, were up-regulated, and three genes
including human transforming growth factor beta inducible gene (Betaig-h3),
alpha-1,2-mannosidase 1A2 (MAN 1A2) gene and an unknown gene were down-regulated 
in the GMA-transformed cells.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of the potential function of these genes suggest that they
may be possibly linked to a variety of cellular processes such as transcription, 
signal transduction, protein synthesis and growth, and that their differential
expression could contribute to the GMA-induced neoplastic transformation.

PMID: 15745248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogene. 2005 May 5;24(20):3369-76.

Accumulation and altered localization of telomere-associated protein TRF2 in
immortally transformed and tumor-derived human breast cells.

Nijjar T(1), Bassett E, Garbe J, Takenaka Y, Stampfer MR, Gilley D, Yaswen P.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA.

We have used cultured human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) and breast
tumor-derived lines to gain information on defects that occur during breast
cancer progression. HMEC immortalized by a variety of agents (the chemical
carcinogen benzo(a)pyrene, oncogenes c-myc and ZNF217, and/or dominant negative
p53 genetic suppressor element GSE22) displayed marked upregulation (10-15 fold) 
of the telomere-binding protein, TRF2. Upregulation of TRF2 protein was
apparently due to differences in post-transcriptional regulation, as mRNA levels 
remained comparable in finite lifespan and immortal HMEC. TRF2 protein was not
upregulated by the oncogenic agents alone in the absence of immortalization, nor 
by expression of exogenously introduced hTERT genes. We found TRF2 levels to be
at least twofold higher than in control cells in 11/15 breast tumor cell lines,
suggesting that elevated TRF2 levels are a frequent occurrence during the
transformation of breast tumor cells in vivo. The dispersed distribution of TRF2 
throughout the nuclei in some immortalized and tumor-derived cells indicated that
not all the TRF2 was associated with telomeres in these cells. The process
responsible for accumulation of TRF2 in immortalized HMEC and breast
tumor-derived cell lines may promote tumorigenesis by contributing to the cells' 
ability to maintain an indefinite lifespan.

PMID: 15735711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;11(2 Pt 1):612-20.

Gene copy number change events at chromosome 20 and their association with
recurrence in gastric cancer patients.

Yang SH(1), Seo MY, Jeong HJ, Jeung HC, Shin J, Kim SC, Noh SH, Chung HC, Rha SY.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Metastasis Research Center, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-ku, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

PURPOSE: This study examined the gene copy number change events at chromosome 20 
in gastric cancer, and their possible relationship with recurrence using cDNA
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty pairs of gastric tumor and normal gastric tissues
were used in the cDNA microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization. The
cDNA microarrays containing 17,000 sequence-verified human gene probes were used 
in a direct comparison design, where genomic DNAs from the normal and tumor
tissues were labeled with fluorescent dyes Cy3 and Cy5, respectively, and
cohybridized. Genes with log(2) (Cy5/Cy3) > or = 0.58 in at least one case were
selected as the amplified genes. In order to search for the association between
gene copy number changes and the recurrence status, patients were grouped
according to their recurrence status. Gene selection between the two groups was
done, and each patient was given a score based on the sum of the selected genes' 
ratios. Logistic regression analysis was carried out in order to determine if the
score of a group of patients was correlated with a recurrence.
RESULTS: A group of genes including NCOA6, CYP24A1, PTPN1, and ZNF217 was
amplified in gastric cancer. Another group of 39 genes, whose sum of copy number 
change levels was significantly associated with a poor prognosis for recurrence, 
was selected (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Ninety-six amplified genes at chromosome 20 of gastric cancer are
reported. A scoring system based on gene copy changes at chromosome 20 can
provide an independent patient grouping system that can distinguish patient
recurrence status and survival.

PMID: 15701848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Pathol. 2005 Apr;205(5):592-6.

Simultaneous over-expression of the Her2/neu and PTK6 tyrosine kinases in
archival invasive ductal breast carcinomas.

Born M(1), Quintanilla-Fend L, Braselmann H, Reich U, Richter M, Hutzler P,
Aubele M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, GSF-National Research Centre for Environment and
Health, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

Expression of eight tumour-relevant genes was studied in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue from 54 invasive ductal breast carcinomas using
quantitative reverse transcription PCR (Q-RT-PCR). Seven of the genes map to
chromosome 20q and are potential candidates for gene amplification and
over-expression. The Her2/neu oncogene, on chromosome 17q, was investigated in
the same tumours. Increased expression was most frequent for PTK6, Her2/neu, and 
ADA. No other 20q candidate gene (AIB1, PTPN1, ZNF217, and PFDN4) was prominent. 
A significant correlation between the expression of the tyrosine kinases PTK6 and
Her2/neu was detected. The frequent elevation of PTK6 expression (in 43/54
tumours), and its correlation with Her2/neu oncogene over-expression, suggests a 
clinically relevant link between these two over-expressed tyrosine kinases.

PMID: 15685689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Pathol. 2005 Mar;205(4):514-21.

Chromosomal instability in flat adenomas and carcinomas of the colon.

Postma C(1), Hermsen MA, Coffa J, Baak JP, Mueller JD, Mueller E, Bethke B,
Schouten JP, Stolte M, Meijer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Flat adenomas are flat or slightly elevated dysplastic lesions of the colorectal 
mucosa, mostly with a tubular architecture. Compared with polypoid adenomas of
similar size, flat adenomas show a higher frequency of high-grade dysplasia and
rapid submucosal invasion. The aim of this study was to survey whether flat
colorectal lesions differ in their pattern of chromosomal aberrations from their 
polypoid counterparts. Six flat adenomas and 12 flat carcinomas were analysed by 
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and the pattern of chromosomal
aberrations was compared with a previously published series of 112 polypoid
adenomas and 82 polypoid carcinomas. In addition, multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification (MLPA) for identifying DNA copy number changes of 25
individual genes on chromosome 20 was performed on 14 flat and 15 polypoid
tumours. With CGH, flat adenomas showed on average 1.8 gains (range 1-4) and 3.2 
losses (range 0-4), and the flat carcinomas 4.5 gains (range 0-8) and 3.5 losses 
(range 1-6). In both adenomas and carcinomas, high frequencies of 20q gain (83%
and 92%, respectively) and 18q loss (83% and 92%, respectively) were found. This 
correlation between 20q gain and 18q loss had previously been observed in a
subgroup of polypoid colorectal tumours. Both flat and polypoid colorectal
tumours with 20q gains by CGH showed similar patterns of copy number ratios for
the individual genes tested. TOP1, BCL2L1, and E2F1 had median copy number ratios
of 2 or higher, while ZNF217 had a ratio around 3. In conclusion, flat adenomas
and carcinomas of the large intestine show a similar pattern of chromosomal
aberrations to that observed in a specific subgroup of polypoid lesions. The
transcription factor ZNF217 is an important candidate for driving the 20q gain.

PMID: 15685687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Environ Sci Technol. 2004 Dec 1;38(23):6396-406.

Gene expression profiles for detecting and distinguishing potential
endocrine-disrupting compounds in environmental samples.

Wang DY(1), McKague B, Liss SN, Edwards EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E5.

Industrial and municipal processes may produce and release endocrine-disrupting
compounds (EDCs) into the environment, but the exact nature of their effects is
difficult to investigate. EDCs typically exert their effect by affecting gene
expression aberrantly. To determine if gene expression profiles could be used to 
detect and distinguish estrogenic EDCs, an estrogen receptor positive human
breast cancer cell line (MCF-7) was exposed to known estrogenic compounds,
suspected EDCs, and extracts from three effluent samples. A set of specifically
estrogen-regulated genes was identified by microarray analysis. Nine estrogen
up-regulated genes (IGFBP4, HSPA8, B4GALT1, XBP1, KRT8, GTPBP4, HNRPAB, SLC2A1,
and CALM1) and two estrogen down-regulated genes (ID2 and ZNF217) were
consistently detectable in response to estrogen and other estrogenic compounds.
Gene expression patterns in cells that were exposed to effluent sample extracts
were compared to gene expression patterns in cells that were exposed to known
endocrines. Using this technique, two of the effluent samples were shown to have 
estrogenic activity. This approach could easily be extended to screen for other
types of receptor-mediated endocrine disruption. For example, cells expressing
androgen or aryl hydrocarbon receptors could be used in gene expression profiling
assays to detect androgenic effects or for the presence of bioactive aromatic
hydrocarbons. Gene expression profiling is emerging as a sensitive and specific
method to screen complex samples for endocrine disrupting activity.

PMID: 15597897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Pathol. 2004 Nov;204(3):282-8.

The candidate oncogene ZNF217 is frequently amplified in colon cancer.

Rooney PH(1), Boonsong A, McFadyen MC, McLeod HL, Cassidy J, Curran S, Murray GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen, UK.

In this study we have defined the changes in gene copy number of the candidate
oncogene ZNF217 during colon cancer development and progression. This gene is
mapped to chromosome 20q and lies within 20q13.2, a region which we have
previously shown to be highly amplified in colorectal cancer by comparative
genomic hybridization. The gene copy number of ZNF217 was assessed in 100 colon
carcinomas (19 Dukes' A, 42 Dukes' B and 39 Dukes' C), 13 colonic adenomas and 10
normal colon samples. DNA extracted from laser microdissected cells was amplified
by multiplex real-time PCR at two distinct gene loci--ZNF217 and beta-globin
(control gene)--on an ABI7700 sequence detection system. Of the 100 colon cancers
studied, 61 showed some level of amplification of ZNF217, 15 had loss of ZNF217, 
while 24 were diploid. All the adenomas except one were diploid. In this study we
have found that ZNF217 amplification is a frequent event in colon cancer and that
the extent of its amplification varies markedly between tumours (range 3-13
copies). There was a trend toward poorer survival in patients whose cancers had
either gain or loss of ZNF217.

Copyright (c) 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 15476264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Cancer. 2004 Oct 10;111(6):968-71.

Frequent amplification and overexpression of CCND1 in male breast cancer.

Bärlund M(1), Kuukasjärvi T, Syrjäkoski K, Auvinen A, Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, University of 
Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Finland.

Genetic events underlying the pathogenesis of breast cancer have been studied
extensively and several clinically significant markers have been identified. For 
example, amplification and overexpression of the ERBB2 oncogene is associated
with poor prognosis in breast cancer and ERBB2 serves as a target for
antibody-based therapy. Current knowledge on the pathogenesis of male breast
cancer (MBC) is limited. The purpose of our study was to investigate the
potential relevance of a series of genes known to be amplified in female breast
cancer (FBC) in a the development and pathogenesis of MBC. To this end, we
applied fluorescence in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry to the
analysis of 128 breast tumors from males. Amplification of ERBB2, MYC, PPM1D and 
ZNF217 was detected rarely (1-2% of tumors) indicating a considerably lower
amplification frequency than in FBC. CCND1 amplification was observed in 12% of
cases, being in good concordance with findings from FBC. In addition, CCND1
overexpression was detected in 63% of tumors and was associated with ER
positivity (p < 0.0001). Our results indicate distinct differences in the genetic
basis of MBC and FBC and suggest that marked differences exist in the
pathogenesis of these diseases. The lack of ERBB2 involvement was especially
unexpected and implies that ERBB2-targeted therapies are unlikely to be
beneficial in MBC. Furthermore, the high frequency of hormone receptor positivity
and the association between ER positivity and CCND1 overexpression supports the
notion that hormonal regulation is likely to be essential for the development of 
MBC.

PMID: 15300811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nat Genet. 2004 Sep;36(9):984-8. Epub 2004 Aug 8.

In situ analyses of genome instability in breast cancer.

Chin K(1), de Solorzano CO, Knowles D, Jones A, Chou W, Rodriguez EG, Kuo WL,
Ljung BM, Chew K, Myambo K, Miranda M, Krig S, Garbe J, Stampfer M, Yaswen P,
Gray JW, Lockett SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of California San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Sep;36(9):932-4.

Transition through telomere crisis is thought to be a crucial event in the
development of most breast carcinomas. Our goal in this study was to determine
where this occurs in the context of histologically defined breast cancer
progression. To this end, we assessed genome instability (using fluorescence in
situ hybridization) and other features associated with telomere crisis in normal 
ductal epithelium, usual ductal hyperplasia, ductal carcinoma in situ and
invasive cancer. We modeled this process in vitro by measuring these same
features in human mammary epithelial cell cultures during ZNF217-mediated
transition through telomere crisis and immortalization. Taken together, the data 
suggest that transition through telomere crisis and immortalization in breast
cancer occurs during progression from usual ductal hyperplasia to ductal
carcinoma in situ.

PMID: 15300252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2004 Jul 1;64(13):4428-33.

Genomic DNA-chip hybridization reveals a higher incidence of genomic
amplifications in pancreatic cancer than conventional comparative genomic
hybridization and leads to the identification of novel candidate genes.

Holzmann K(1), Kohlhammer H, Schwaenen C, Wessendorf S, Kestler HA, Schwoerer A, 
Rau B, Radlwimmer B, Döhner H, Lichter P, Gress T, Bentz M.

Author information: 
(1)Chip Facility, Abt. Innere Medizin III, Universität Ulm, Germany.
karlheinz.holzmann@medizin.uni-ulm.de

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6358.

Genomic analyses aimed at the detection of high-level DNA amplifications were
performed on 13 widely used pancreatic cancer cell lines and 6 pancreatic tumor
specimens. For these analyses, array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(Matrix-CGH) onto dedicated microarrays was used. In comparison with chromosomal 
CGH (eight amplifications), a >3-fold number of DNA amplifications was detected
(n = 29). The most frequent amplifications mapped to 7p12.3 (three pancreatic
cancer cell lines and three pancreatic tumor specimens), 8q24 (four pancreatic
cancer cell lines and one pancreatic tumor specimen), 11q13 (three pancreatic
cancer cell lines and three pancreatic tumor specimens), and 20q13 (four
pancreatic cancer cell lines and three pancreatic tumor specimens). Genes
contained in the consensus regions were MYC (8q24), EGFR (7p12.3), and FGF3
(11q13). In six of seven pancreatic cancer cell lines and pancreatic tumor
specimens with 20q13 amplifications, the novel candidate gene NFAT C2, which
plays a role in the activation of cytokines, was amplified. Other amplifications 
also affected genes for which a pathogenetic role in pancreatic carcinoma has not
been described, such as BCL10 and BCL6, two members of the BCL family. A subset
of amplified genes was checked for overexpression by means of real-time PCR,
revealing the highest expression levels for BCL6 and BCL10. Thus, Matrix-CGH
allows the detection of a high number of amplifications, resulting in the
identification of novel candidate genes in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 15231651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Pathol. 2004 Jul;203(3):780-8.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization for the detection of DNA sequence
copy number changes in Barrett's adenocarcinoma.

Albrecht B(1), Hausmann M, Zitzelsberger H, Stein H, Siewert JR, Hopt U, Langer
R, Höfler H, Werner M, Walch A.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Freiburg, Institute of Pathology, Freiburg i Br, Germany.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) allows the identification of
DNA sequence copy number changes at high resolution by co-hybridizing
differentially labelled test and control DNAs to a micro-array of genomic clones.
The present study has analysed a series of 23 formalin-fixed, paraffin
wax-embedded tissue samples of Barrett's adenocarcinoma (BCA, n = 18) and
non-neoplastic squamous oesophageal (n = 2) and gastric cardia mucosa (n = 3) by 
aCGH. The micro-arrays used contained 287 genomic targets covering oncogenes,
tumour suppressor genes, and DNA sequences localized within chromosomal regions
previously reported to be altered in BCA. DNA sequence copy number changes for a 
panel of approximately 50 genes were identified, most of which have not been
previously described in BCA. DNA sequence copy number gains (mean 41 +/- 25/BCA) 
were more frequent than DNA sequence copy number losses (mean 20 +/- 15/BCA). The
highest frequencies for DNA sequence copy number gains were detected for SNRPN
(61%); GNLY (44%); NME1 (44%); DDX15, ABCB1 (MDR), ATM, LAMA3, MYBL2, ZNF217, and
TNFRSF6B (39% each); and MSH2, TERC, SERPINE1, AFM137XA11, IGF1R, and PTPN1 (33% 
each). DNA sequence copy number losses were identified for PDGFB (44%); D17S125
(39%); AKT3 (28%); and RASSFI, FHIT, CDKN2A (p16), and SAS (CDK4) (28% each). In 
all non-neoplastic tissue samples of squamous oesophageal and gastric cardia
mucosa, the measured mean ratios were 1.00 (squamous oesophageal mucosa) or 1.01 
(gastric mucosa), indicating that no DNA sequence copy number chances were
present. For validation, the DNA sequence copy number changes of selected clones 
(SNRPN, CMYC, HER2, ZNF217) detected by aCGH were confirmed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH). These data show the sensitivity of aCGH for the
identification of DNA sequence copy number changes at high resolution in BCA. The
newly identified genes may include so far unknown biomarkers in BCA and are
therefore a starting point for further studies elucidating their possible role in
Barrett's carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 15221937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Hum Antibodies. 2003;12(4):99-112.

Predicting antigenic peptides suitable for the selection of phage antibodies.

Pavlik P(1), Siegel RW, Marzari R, Sblattero D, Verzillo V, Collins C, Marks JD, 
Bradbury A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545,
USA.

Selection from phage antibody libraries can be considered to be an in vitro
immune system in which the antibody response is reduced to the bare minimum of
antigen recognition. Using selections of antibodies on peptides from a phage
antibody library, we investigated what constitutes peptide antigenicity in the
context of the antibody-protein binding site. We selected polyclonal antibodies
in a high throughput format against 44% of 90 overlapping peptides derived from
three different proteins. Of these, 33% of peptides (epitopic peptides) were able
to select antibodies that recognized the protein from which the peptides were
derived. Although no algorithm was able to predict all epitopic peptides, solvent
accessibility was the best predictor in this cell-free antibody selection
context. We subsequently applied solvent accessibility to successfully predict
epitopic peptides from p53 and Znf217, and showed that such peptide selected
single-chain antibodies were able to recognize soluble p53 in ELISA and Znf217 in
a western blot. This is likely to have considerable utility in functional
genomics and proteomics where it should be possible to select antibodies against 
gene products on the basis of deduced amino acid sequence in a high throughput
fashion.

PMID: 15156098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 May 1;10(9):3013-9.

Comparative study between DNA copy number aberrations determined by quantitative 
microsatellite analysis and clinical outcome in patients with stomach cancer.

Suzuki S(1), Egami K, Sasajima K, Ghazizadeh M, Shimizu H, Watanabe H, Hasegawa
H, Iida S, Matsuda T, Okihama Y, Hosone M, Shimizu K, Kawanami O, Tajiri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tama-Nagayama Hospital, Nippon Medical School,
Tama-Shi, Tokyo, Japan. seiji@nms.ac.jp

PURPOSE: We detected the relative DNA copy numbers (RCNs) at target loci in
patients with stomach cancer with quantitative microsatellite analysis. We
additionally clarified the relationship between DNA copy number aberrations and
the clinical outcome of the patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Fresh frozen samples were obtained from 30 patients who had 
undergone surgery for stomach cancer. Seven microsatellite loci in chromosomes
8q, 16q, and 20q and one gene-specific locus (ZNF217) were selected as the target
loci. The DNA copy number was obtained relatively to a pooled reference
consisting of six microsatellite primer sets selected from the regions where few 
aberrations have been reported in comparative genomic hybridization analysis. On 
the basis of the TaqMan PCR system, the internal probes used were carrying donor 
(6-carboxyfluorescein) and acceptor (6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine) fluorescent
molecules complementary to CA repeats in the microsatellite markers and to one
gene-specific oligomer in the gene-specific marker.
RESULTS: Chromosome 8q gain, 20q gain, and 16q loss were detected in 18 (60.0%), 
8 (26.7%), and 13 (43.3%) cases, respectively. Gains in the RCNs of D8S1801 and
D8S1724 were most frequently found (36.7%). There was a significant correlation
between the loss of D16S3026 and reduced survival duration (P = 0.0158), and the 
simultaneous aberrations of D8S1801 gain and D16S3026 loss (double marker
positive) was significantly associated with reduced survival duration (P =
0.0008). According to Cox proportional hazards model, the double marker positive 
was a significant and independent factor indicating an unfavorable prognostic
factor (relative risk, 17.176; 95% confidence interval, 2.782-106.026; P =
0.0022).
CONCLUSION: RCN aberrations in tumor tissues determined by quantitative
microsatellite analysis enable identification of the prognostic factors that
correlate with clinical outcome of the patients with stomach cancer.

PMID: 15131037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Apr;32(2):397-414.

Estrogen regulation in human breast cancer cells of new downstream gene targets
involved in estrogen metabolism, cell proliferation and cell transformation.

Vendrell JA(1), Magnino F, Danis E, Duchesne MJ, Pinloche S, Pons M, Birnbaum D, 
Nguyen C, Theillet C, Cohen PA.

Author information: 
(1)EMI 0229 INSERM, Centre de Recherche CRLC Val d'Aurelle, Montpellier, France.

We explored, by cDNA mini-arrays, gene expression measurements of MVLN, a human
breast carcinoma cell line derived from MCF-7, after 4 days of exposure to
17beta-estradiol (E(2)) treatment, in order to extend our understanding of the
mechanism of the pharmacological action of estrogens. We focused on 22 genes
involved in estrogen metabolism, cell proliferation regulation and cell
transformation. The specificity of the E(2) response was reinforced by comparison
with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (OH-Tam), ICI 182,780 and E(2)+OH-Tam expression
profiles. Real-time quantitative PCR (RTQ-PCR) confirmed the variation of
expression of known (TFF1, AREG, IRS1, IGFBP4, PCNA, ERBB2, CTSD, MYC) as well as
novel (DLEU2, CCNA2, UGT1A1, ABCC3, ABCC5, TACC1, EFNA1, NOV, CSTA, MMP15,
ZNF217) genes. The temporal response of these gene expression regulations was
then investigated after 6 and 18 h of E(2) treatment and this allowed the
identification of different time-course patterns. Cycloheximide treatment studies
indicated first that estrogen affected the transcript levels of ABCC3 and ABCC5
through dissimilar pathways, and secondly that protein synthesis was needed for
modulation of the expression of the CCNA2 and TACC1 genes by estrogens. Western
blot analysis performed on TFF1, IRS1, IGFBP4, amphiregulin, PCNA, cyclin A2,
TACC1 and ABCC5 proteins confirmed the mini-array and RTQ-PCR data, even for
genes harboring low variations of mRNA expression. Our findings should enhance
the understanding of changes induced by E(2) on the transcriptional program of
human E(2)-responsive cells and permit the identification of new potential
diagnostic/prognostic tools for the monitoring of estrogen-related disease
conditions such as breast cancer.

PMID: 15072547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Pathol. 2003 Jul;200(3):320-6.

Determination of amplicon boundaries at 20q13.2 in tissue samples of human
gastric adenocarcinomas by high-resolution microarray comparative genomic
hybridization.

Weiss MM(1), Snijders AM, Kuipers EJ, Ylstra B, Pinkel D, Meuwissen SG, van Diest
PJ, Albertson DG, Meijer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) of gastric adenocarcinomas frequently
shows gains and amplifications of chromosome 20. However, the underlying genetic 
lesion is unknown and conventional CGH results do not allow specification of the 
target region. In order to investigate this chromosomal aberration with a higher 
resolution and sensitivity, microarray-based CGH was performed with both scanning
and high-resolution arrays of chromosome 20 in a series of 27 gastric
adenocarcinomas. Locus-specific fragments of genomic DNA from bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) clones were spotted as microarrays. A scanning array 
contained a set of 27 BAC clones covering chromosome 20q. A high-resolution array
contained 27 overlapping BAC clones at 20q13.2. This high-resolution array was
used to narrow down the amplicon at 20q13.2 in tumours showing amplification of
this chromosomal region with the scanning array. Positive copy number changes on 
chromosome 20q were detected in 12 of 27 cases (44%). These changes included gain
of the whole arm of chromosome 20q in 8 of 27 (30%) cases, amplification
restricted to 20q12.1 in one case, and amplifications restricted to 20q13 in
three cases (11%). The three tumours showing amplification restricted to 20q13
were analysed further using the high-resolution array. In one tumour, the whole
contig was amplified at a constant level. One of the other two tumours had a
clear proximal breakpoint, while the other tumour had a clear distal breakpoint
within the 20q13.2 region. The proximal and the distal breakpoint were
approximately 800 kb apart. In the present study, an amplicon at 20q13.2 has been
narrowed down to 800 kb which is likely to harbour one or more putative oncogenes
relevant to gastric carcinogenesis, for which ZNF217 and CYP24 are good
candidates.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12845628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Res. 2003 Mar 15;63(6):1179-82.

Tissue microarray analysis reveals site-specific prevalence of oncogene
amplifications in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Freier K(1), Joos S, Flechtenmacher C, Devens F, Benner A, Bosch FX, Lichter P,
Hofele C.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Abteilung Molekulare Genetik (H0700),
Heidelberg, Germany.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization was applied on a collection of 609 squamous
cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCCs),including 511 primary carcinomas of
different clinical stage and anatomical localization and 98 recurrent carcinomas,
second primary carcinomas, and regional metastases on a tissue microarray. The
overall prevalence of amplifications of five oncogenes analyzed was 34.5% for
CCND1, 12.7% for EGFR, 8.8% for MYC, 6.2% for ZNF217, and 3.6% for ERBB2. CCND1
amplifications were associated with the pharyngeal site in primary carcinomas (P 
< 0.001), whereas amplifications of ZNF217 were less frequent in pharyngeal
carcinomas as compared with primary oral and laryngeal carcinomas (P = 0.02). The
amplification pattern of these oncogenes suggests that different molecular
pathways are involved in HNSCCs of different localizations.

PMID: 12649172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Clin Pathol. 2002 Dec;118(6):922-9.

CAS (cellular apoptosis susceptibility) gene expression in ovarian carcinoma:
Correlation with 20q13.2 copy number and cyclin D1, p53, and Rb protein
expression.

Peiró G(1), Diebold J, Löhrs U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Germany.

We immunohistochemically analyzed cellular apoptosis susceptibility (CAS) protein
expression and compared it with 20q13.2 copy number and the expression of cell
cycle-associated proteins retinoblastoma (Rb), cyclin D1, and p53 and prognosis
on paraffin-embedded tissue from 69 ovarian carcinomas (OCs). CAS protein
reactivity was present in 100%, Rb in 54%, cyclin D1 in 47%, and p53 in 49%.
Significant reciprocal correlation was observed between high levels of CAS and
histologic type, FIGO (International Federation of Obstetrics and Gynecology)
stage III and grade 3, residual tumor (>2 cm), 20q13.2 (ZNF217 gene)
amplification (>4 copies in >20% cells), and high expression of cyclin D1 (all P 
< .05). No association was found between cyclin D1, p53, or Rb levels with
clinicopathologic factors. In univariate analysis, residual tumor, FIGO stage and
grade, ZNF217 amplification, and CAS levels predicted outcome (all P < .05). In
multivariate analysis, stage, grade, amount of residual tumor, and ZNF217
amplification showed independent prognostic value (all P < .05). In OC,
alteration of CAS and ZNF217 genes, both located at 20q13, is frequent and
relevant prognostically. Cyclin D1, Rb, and p53 seem to have a secondary role.

PMID: 12472286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cancer Res. 2002 Dec 1;62(23):6803-7.

Multiple genes in human 20q13 chromosomal region are involved in an advanced
prostate cancer xenograft.

Bar-Shira A(1), Pinthus JH, Rozovsky U, Goldstein M, Sellers WR, Yaron Y, Eshhar 
Z, Orr-Urtreger A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv 64239, Israel.

We analyzed a prostate cancer xenograft derived from a locally advanced tumor
using combined cytogenetic, array-based comparative genomic hybridization and
expression analyses. This analysis revealed that genes in the 20q13 chromosomal
region, CSE1L, ZNF217, MYBL2, and STK15, were significantly overexpressed in this
tumor. The expression pattern of these genes was then confirmed in two large
human prostate cancer microarray databases. Furthermore, the MYBL2 and STK15 have
been significantly overexpressed in prostate metastases, allowing a clear
distinction between localized tumors and metastases. Our data suggest these genes
to be involved in advanced stages of prostate tumorigenesis and as such, they may
serve as markers for tumor progression.

PMID: 12460888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2002 Oct;93(10):1114-22.

Differentially regulated genes as putative targets of amplifications at 20q in
ovarian cancers.

Watanabe T(1), Imoto I, Katahira T, Hirasawa A, Ishiwata I, Emi M, Takayama M,
Sato A, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Frequent amplification of DNA at 20q or part of 20q has been demonstrated by
comparative genomic hybridization in ovarian cancer (OC), but the genetic
target(s) of these amplification events remain unknown. We examined copy-number
changes with respect to six candidate genes, E2F1 (20q11.2), TGIF2 (20q11.2),
AIB1 (20q12), PTPN1 (20q13.1), ZNF217 (20q13.2), and BTAK (20q13), and then
measured transcription levels of each candidate in 18 OC cell lines. Three
distinct cores of amplification were identified: 20q11.2, harboring E2F1 and
TGIF2 (region I; 1 of 18 cell lines, 5.6%); 20q13.1, harboring PTPN1 (region II; 
5 lines, 27.8%); and 20q13.2, harboring ZNF217 and BTAK (region III; 6 lines,
33.3%). Among the six genes examined, expression levels of PTPN1 and ZNF217 were 
significantly correlated with absolute copy-number, and those of PTPN1 and TGIF2 
were significantly correlated with copy-number relative to the centromere of
chromosome 20 (20cen). Among 19 primary OCs examined, moreover, we observed
amplification of TGIF2, PTPN1 and ZNF217 in five (26.3%), ten (52.6%), and twelve
(63.2%) tumors, respectively. Expression levels of PTPN1 and ZNF217 were
significantly correlated with their copy-numbers in those primary OCs. Our
results suggest that 20q amplifications in OCs can be extensive and complex,
probably due to synergistic or non-synergistic amplification of separate regions 
of 20q, involving multiple, independently amplified targets.

PMID: 12417041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Blood. 2003 Feb 15;101(4):1513-9. Epub 2002 Oct 3.

Amplification and overexpression of JUNB is associated with primary cutaneous
T-cell lymphomas.

Mao X(1), Orchard G, Lillington DM, Russell-Jones R, Young BD, Whittaker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Skin Tumour Unit and Dermatopathology Department, St John's Institute of
Dermatology, St Thomas' Hospital, London, United Kingdom. mxmayo@hotmail.com

Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCLs) represent a heterogeneous group of extranodal 
T- and B-cell malignancies. The underlying molecular pathogenesis of this
malignancy remains unclear. This study aimed to characterize oncogene
abnormalities in PCLs. Using genomic microarray, we detected oncogene copy number
gains of RAF1 (3p25), CTSB (8p22), PAK1 (11q13), and JUNB (19p13) in 5 of 7 cases
of mycosis fungoides (MF)/Sezary syndrome (SS) (71%), gains of FGFR1 (8p11), PTPN
(20q13), and BCR (22q11) in 4 cases (57%), and gains of MYCL1 (1p34), PIK3CA
(3q26), HRAS (11p15), MYBL2 (20q13), and ZNF217 (20q13) in 3 cases (43%).
Amplification of JUNB was studied in 104 DNA samples from 78 PCL cases using
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Twenty-four percent of cases, including 7 of
10 cases of primary cutaneous CD30(+) anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (C-ALCL), 4 
of 14 MF, 4 of 22 SS, and 2 of 23 primary cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (PCBCL)
showed amplification of JUNB, and high-level amplification of this oncogene was
present in 3 C-ALCL and 2 MF cases. JUNB protein expression was analyzed in
tissue sections from 69 PCL cases, and 44% of cases, consisting of 21 of 23 SS, 6
of 8 C-ALCL, 5 of 10 MF, and 9 of 21 PCBCL, demonstrated nuclear expression of
JUNB by tumor cells. Overexpression of JUNB also was detected in 5 C-ALCL and 2
SS cases. These results have revealed, for the first time, amplification and
expression patterns of JUNB in PCL, suggesting that JUNB may be critical in the
pathogenesis of primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 12393503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;34(11):1382-94.

Molecular changes accompanying senescence and immortalization of cultured human
mammary epithelial cells.

Yaswen P(1), Stampfer MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Mailstop 70A-1118, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
p_yaswen@lbl.gov

Limits on the proliferative potential of cultured normal human cells may be
consequences of pathways that exist to suppress tumorigenicity. Human mammary
epithelial cells (HMEC) employ several mechanisms to prevent unlimited growth.
One mechanism may be activated by stress, and is associated with upregulated
expression of p16(INK4a). In serum-free medium, some HMEC arise spontaneously
which do not express p16. These "post-selection" HMEC are capable of long-term
proliferation, but ultimately cease growth when their telomeres become very
short. As they approach a growth plateau, termed agonescence, post-selection HMEC
populations accumulate chromosome abnormalities. In contrast to the crisis
exhibited by cells lacking functional p53, agonescent cells can be maintained as 
viable cultures. Although transduction of hTERT, the catalytic subunit of
telomerase, into post-selection cells can, by itself, efficiently produce
immortality and avoid agonescence, the errors that produce telomerase
reactivation during carcinogenesis are not known. The block to endogenous
telomerase reactivation in HMEC is extremely stringent. However, if one
predisposing error is present, the probability greatly increases that additional 
error(s) required for immortalization may be generated by genomic instability
encountered during agonescence. In p53(+) HMEC immortalized after chemical
carcinogen exposure, the events involved in overcoming agonescence can be
temporally separated from activation of telomerase. We have used the term
"conversion" to describe the gradual process that leads to telomerase activation,
telomere length stabilization, decreased p57 (KIP2) expression, and increased
ability to grow uniformly well in the presence or absence of TGF beta. In the
presence of active p53, conversion may represent a rate-limiting step in immortal
transformation.

PMID: 12200033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 May;135(1):35-41.

Spectrum of genetic changes in gastro-esophageal cancer cell lines determined by 
an integrated molecular cytogenetic approach.

Rosenberg C(1), Geelen E, IJszenga MJ, Pearson P, Tanke HJ, Dinjens WN, van
Dekken H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytochemistry and Cytometry, Department Molecular Cell Biology, 
Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands.
c.rosenberg@lumc.nl

Adenocarcinomas arising around the gastro-esophageal junction (GEJ) are highly
malignant, and their incidence has risen rapidly in the last decades. Cell lines 
are the basic in vitro system for functional and therapeutic studies in GEJ
tumors, but only a small number of cell lines are currently available, and none
of them has been fully karyotyped. We analyzed 5 GEJ tumor cell lines using a
combination of 24-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) and genomic microarrays. Using CGH we demonstrated
that these cell lines present imbalances similar to those we had previously
observed in primary GEJ tumors, namely gains on 1q, 7q, 8q, 17q, 19q, 20, and X, 
and losses on 3p, 4, 5q, 9p, 18q, and 21. Multicolor FISH karyotyping revealed
multiple structural rearrangements involving chromosomes 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13,
17, 18, and 22. Rearrangements of chromosome 8 involved 10 different chromosomes,
while rearrangements of chromosome 17 involved 5. Different rearrangements
resulted in imbalances of similar chromosome regions, suggesting that similar
genomic imbalances are constitutively important but are achieved through
different pathways. The use of a commercially available genomic array excluded
TOP2A (17q), and MYBL2, PTPT1, CSE1L, and ZNF217 (20q) as candidate genes for
frequently amplified areas on these chromosomes, and contributed to refining the 
limits of chromosome regions involved in genomic imbalances.

PMID: 12072201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cytometry. 2001 Oct 1;45(2):83-6.

Improved procedure for fluorescence in situ hybridization on tissue microarrays.

Andersen CL(1), Hostetter G, Grigoryan A, Sauter G, Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4465, USA.

BACKGROUND: The recently developed tissue microarray (TMA) technology allows the 
arrangement of up to a thousand tissue specimens on a single microscope slide.
This technology enables researchers to perform gene copy number studies on very
large series of archival formalin-fixed tissues using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). However, the hybridization properties of individual
archival specimens can vary considerably. Therefore a highly optimized protocol
is needed to fulfill the task of producing evaluable hybridization signals
simultaneously in hundreds of specimens in a TMA.
METHODS: The performance of two different FISH protocols, the standard protocol
for paraffin embedded tissues and our new optimized protocol, was tested on TMAs 
using probes for the HER-2 and ZNF217 genes as well as the chromosome 17
centromere.
RESULTS: The new protocol resulted in greatly increased signal intensity and an
almost 30% increase in the number of tissue samples with evaluable hybridization 
signals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our improved protocol for FISH on TMAs provides standardized
hybridization conditions leading to high-quality hybridization signals in the
majority of specimens. The increases in the signal intensity and the number of
evaluable samples are extremely important for the successful analyses of TMAs by 
FISH and will allow the utilization of the TMA technology in its full potential.

PMID: 11590619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Genome Res. 2001 Jun;11(6):1034-42.

Comprehensive genome sequence analysis of a breast cancer amplicon.

Collins C(1), Volik S, Kowbel D, Ginzinger D, Ylstra B, Cloutier T, Hawkins T,
Predki P, Martin C, Wernick M, Kuo WL, Alberts A, Gray JW.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Francisco Cancer Center, San Francisco,
California 94143-0808, USA. collins@cc.ucsf.edu

Gene amplification occurs in most solid tumors and is associated with poor
prognosis. Amplification of 20q13.2 is common to several tumor types including
breast cancer. The 1 Mb of sequence spanning the 20q13.2 breast cancer amplicon
is one of the most exhaustively studied segments of the human genome. These
studies have included amplicon mapping by comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH), fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH), array-CGH, quantitative
microsatellite analysis (QUMA), and functional genomic studies. Together these
studies revealed a complex amplicon structure suggesting the presence of at least
two driver genes in some tumors. One of these, ZNF217, is capable of
immortalizing human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) when overexpressed. In
addition, we now report the sequencing of this region in human and mouse, and on 
quantitative expression studies in tumors. Amplicon localization now is
straightforward and the availability of human and mouse genomic sequence
facilitates their functional analysis. However, comprehensive annotation of
megabase-scale regions requires integration of vast amounts of information. We
present a system for integrative analysis and demonstrate its utility on 1.2 Mb
of sequence spanning the 20q13.2 breast cancer amplicon and 865 kb of syntenic
murine sequence. We integrate tumor genome copy number measurements with
exhaustive genome landscape mapping, showing that amplicon boundaries are
associated with maxima in repetitive element density and a region of evolutionary
instability. This integration of comprehensive sequence annotation, quantitative 
expression analysis, and tumor amplicon boundaries provide evidence for an
additional driver gene prefoldin 4 (PFDN4), coregulated genes, conserved
noncoding regions, and associate repetitive elements with regions of genomic
instability at this locus.

PMCID: PMC311107
PMID: 11381030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cancer Res. 2001 Feb 15;61(4):1250-4.

The ZNF217 gene amplified in breast cancers promotes immortalization of human
mammary epithelial cells.

Nonet GH(1), Stampfer MR, Chin K, Gray JW, Collins CC, Yaswen P.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

The functional consequences of overexpression of a candidate oncogene on
chromosome 20q13.2, ZNF217, were examined by transducing the gene into finite
life span human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs). In four independent
experiments, ZNF217-transduced cultures gave rise to immortalized cells. HMECs
that overcame senescence initially exhibited heterogeneous growth and continued
telomere erosion, followed by increasing telomerase activity, stabilization of
telomere length, and resistance to transforming growth factor beta growth
inhibition. The incremental changes in telomerase activity and growth that
occurred in ZNF217-transduced cultures after they overcame senescence were
similar to the conversion pattern we have described previously in rare HMEC lines
immortalized after exposure to a chemical carcinogen. Aberrant expression of
ZNF217 may be selected for during breast cancer progression because it allows
breast cells to overcome senescence and attain immortality.

PMID: 11245413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cancer Res. 2000 Oct 1;60(19):5405-9.

Measurement of DNA copy number at microsatellite loci using quantitative PCR
analysis.

Ginzinger DG(1), Godfrey TE, Nigro J, Moore DH 2nd, Suzuki S, Pallavicini MG,
Gray JW, Jensen RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, 94143, USA.

This report describes the development and validation of quantitative
microsatellite analysis (QuMA) for rapid measurement of relative DNA sequence
copy number. In QuMA, the copy number of a test locus relative to a pooled
reference is assessed using quantitative, real-time PCR amplification of loci
carrying simple sequence repeats. Use of simple sequence repeats is advantageous 
because of the large numbers that are mapped precisely. In addition, all markers 
are informative because QuMA does not require that they be polymorphic. The
utility of QuMA is demonstrated in assessment of the extent of deletions of
chromosome 2 in leukemias arising in radiation-sensitive inbred SJL mice and in
analysis of the association of increased copy number of the putative oncogene
ZNF217 with reduced survival duration in ovarian cancer patients.

PMID: 11034080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Jul;6(7):2712-7.

Differences in 20q13.2 copy number between colorectal cancers with and without
liver metastasis.

Hidaka S(1), Yasutake T, Takeshita H, Kondo M, Tsuji T, Nanashima A, Sawai T,
Yamaguchi H, Nakagoe T, Ayabe H, Tagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Surgery, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Nagasaki City, Japan. shigekazu.hidaka@nifty.ne.jp

Frequent gains of 20q have been identified recently in many neoplasias, including
breast, bladder, ovarian, pancreatic, and colon cancers. A high level of 20q13.2 
amplification is associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. We investigated
the copy number of the 20q13.2 region including the ZNF217 oncogene in 17
nonmetastatic colorectal cancers (CRCs), 18 primary CRC tumors with liver
metastasis, and 18 metastatic lesions by two-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization to evaluate the significance of an increased copy number of 20q13.2
in CRC, especially in those cases with liver metastasis. The frequency of
increased relative copy number of the 20q13.2 region was higher in primary and
liver metastatic lesions of CRC than in CRC lesions without liver metastasis. In 
particular, a high-level increase (>3.0-fold) in the relative copy number of
20q13.2 was observed in 2 of 18 (11%) primary CRC lesions with liver metastasis, 
7 of 18 (39%) liver metastatic lesions, and in none of the cases of primary CRC
without liver metastasis. The absolute and relative copy number of chromosome
20q13.2 was higher in CRCs with metastasis than in CRCs without metastasis. The
percentage of cells with high-level 20q13.2 amplification was also higher in both
lesions with metastasis per specimen than without metastasis. Our results suggest
that the level of 20q13.2 amplification correlates with the metastatic potential 
and tumor progression of CRC. The results also suggest that 20q13.2 amplification
with ZNF217 is associated with increased metastatic potential.

PMID: 10914715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nat Genet. 2000 Jun;25(2):144-6.

Quantitative mapping of amplicon structure by array CGH identifies CYP24 as a
candidate oncogene.

Albertson DG(1), Ylstra B, Segraves R, Collins C, Dairkee SH, Kowbel D, Kuo WL,
Gray JW, Pinkel D.

Author information: 
(1)[1] Cancer Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, Box
0808, San Francisco, California, USA. albertson@cc.ucsf.edu

We show here that quantitative measurement of DNA copy number across amplified
regions using array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) may facilitate
oncogene identification by providing precise information on the locations of both
amplicon boundaries and amplification maxima. Using this analytical capability,
we resolved two regions of amplification within an approximately 2-Mb region of
recurrent aberration at 20q13.2 in breast cancer. The putative oncogene ZNF217
(ref. 5) mapped to one peak, and CYP24 (encoding vitamin D 24 hydroxylase), whose
overexpression is likely to lead to abrogation of growth control mediated by
vitamin D, mapped to the other.

PMID: 10835626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 May;6(5):1833-9.

Frequent amplification of chromosomal region 20q12-q13 in ovarian cancer.

Tanner MM(1), Grenman S, Koul A, Johannsson O, Meltzer P, Pejovic T, Borg A,
Isola JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, Tampere
University and University Hospital, Finland. blmita@uta.fi

DNA amplification at chromosomal region 20q12-q13, which is common in breast
cancer, has recently been described also in ovarian tumors. We studied the
amplification of the recently identified candidate oncogenes in this region in 24
sporadic, 3 familial and 4 hereditary ovarian carcinomas, and in 8 ovarian cancer
cell lines. High-level amplification of at least one of the five nonsyntenic
regions at 20q12-q13.2 was found in 13 sporadic (54%) and in all four hereditary 
tumors. Typically, two or more distinct amplicons (separated by nonamplified DNA)
were found coamplified in various combinations. The regions defined by the AIB1
and PTPN1 genes (at 20q12 and 20q13.1, respectively) were amplified in 25% and
29% of the sporadic tumors, also without simultaneous coamplification of other
regions. Amplification of AIB1 (a steroid receptor coactivator gene) was
associated with estrogen receptor positivity in sporadic ovarian carcinomas (P = 
0.01) and showed a tendency to correlate with poor survival of patients. Of the
genes amplified in breast cancer, the BTAK gene was amplified in 21%, the MYBL2
gene in 17%, and the ZNF217 gene in 12.5% of the sporadic tumors. The high
frequency of gene amplification at 20q12-q13.2 suggests that the genes amplified 
therein may play a central role in the pathogenesis of sporadic and hereditary
ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 10815905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 21;95(15):8703-8.

Positional cloning of ZNF217 and NABC1: genes amplified at 20q13.2 and
overexpressed in breast carcinoma.

Collins C(1), Rommens JM, Kowbel D, Godfrey T, Tanner M, Hwang SI, Polikoff D,
Nonet G, Cochran J, Myambo K, Jay KE, Froula J, Cloutier T, Kuo WL, Yaswen P,
Dairkee S, Giovanola J, Hutchinson GB, Isola J, Kallioniemi OP, Palazzolo M,
Martin C, Ericsson C, Pinkel D, Albertson D, Li WB, Gray JW.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA.

We report here the molecular cloning of an approximately 1-Mb region of recurrent
amplification at 20q13.2 in breast cancer and other tumors and the delineation of
a 260-kb common region of amplification. Analysis of the 1-Mb region produced
evidence for five genes, ZNF217, ZNF218, and NABC1, PIC1L (PIC1-like), CYP24, and
a pseudogene CRP (Cyclophillin Related Pseudogene). ZNF217 and NABC1 emerged as
strong candidate oncogenes and were characterized in detail. NABC1 is predicted
to encode a 585-aa protein of unknown function and is overexpressed in most but
not all breast cancer cell lines in which it was amplified. ZNF217 is centrally
located in the 260-kb common region of amplification, transcribed in multiple
normal tissues, and overexpressed in all cell lines and tumors in which it is
amplified and in two in which it is not. ZNF217 is predicted to encode
alternately spliced, Kruppel-like transcription factors of 1,062 and 1,108 aa,
each having a DNA-binding domain (eight C2H2 zinc fingers) and a proline-rich
transcription activation domain.

PMCID: PMC21140
PMID: 9671742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


